National Disaster Management Authority
1.6 Naming of Tropical Cyclones 6
1.9 Past Initiatives: National Level 7
1.10 P aradigm Shift: Past Initiatives by some States 10
1.11 Paradigm Sh ift in DM: Genesis of the DM Act 10
1.12 Institutional Framework 11
1.13 E xisting Institutional Arrangements 13
1.14 Nati onal Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project 15
1.15 N ational Guidelines: Genesis, Structure and Implementation Strategy 15
2.2 Present Status and Future Strategies 17
2.3 Prediction of Severe Weather and Storm Surges 23
2.4 Cyclone Forecasting and Emergency Management Networks 24
2.5 Parametric Wind Field and Cyclone Risk Models 24
2.6 Implementation of Impact Assessment and
Emergency Response Management System 25
2.8 Cyclone Warning Generation 27
2.9 Requirement of Additional Support Infrastructure 30
2.10 Suggested Common and Differentiated Activities 32
2.12 Im plementation Strategy and Time-Frame 35
3 Warning: Communication and Dissemination 36
3.3 Initiatives at the National Level 37
3.6 Communication Support for DM 41
3.7 Existing Backbone Communication Infrastructure 41
3.8 Development of State-of-the-Art Dissemination and
Communication Infrastructure 47
3.9 Integration of Networks 49
3.10 Prio rities at State/District Level 49
3.11 Implementation I ssues 50
3.13 Im plementation Strategy and Time-Frame 52
4 Structural Mitigation Measures 53
4.2 Buildings: Cyclone Shelters 54
4.3 Road Links, Culverts and Bridges 60
4.4 Canals, Drains, Surface Water Tanks 62
4.6 Communication Towers and Power Transmission Networks 63
4.9 Implementation Strategy and Time-Frame 67
5 Management of Coastal Zones 68
5.2 Coastal Zone Management Issues 68
5.3 Issues of Sustainability of Coastal Resources and Environment 77
5.7 Shelterbelt Plantations 84
5.8 Coastal Flood Plain Management 86
5.11 New Environment Policy 90
5.12 C rop and Livestock Protection 90
5.13 Live lihood Protection of Handloom Weavers 92
5.15 Im plementation Strategy and Time-Frame 97
6.4 Community Based Disaster Management (CBDM) 102
6.6 Implementation Strategy and Time-Frame 105
7 Disaster Risk Management and Capacity Development 106
7.2 Issues of Cyclone Disaster Risk Management 106
7.3 Vulnerability Analysis and Risk Assessment 106
7.4 Estimation of Possible Inundation Levels 106
7.5 Estimation of Maximum Possible Damage 108
7.7 Village Scale Risk and Vulnerability 109
7.8 Spatial Decision Support Systems for Cyclone Management 110
7.9 Cyclone Disaster Management Information System 112
7.10 C apacity Development 117
7.11 Community C apacity Building 120
7.12 H andling Societal Impacts of Tropical Cyclones 122
7.13 Documentation of Events 123
7.14 N ational Cyclone Disaster Management Institute (NCDMI) 124
7.15 R ole of DM Department in States 126
7.17 Im plementation Strategy and Time-Frame 129
8.2 Disaster Response Mechanism 130
8.3 Disaster Response Platform 133
8.4 Linking Risk Knowledge with Response Planning 134
8.5 Effective Disaster Response Capability 135
8.6 Other Supportive Efforts 136
8.7 Development of Evacuation Plan with Schedule of Actions 137
8.8 Medical Preparedness and Response 137
8.9 India Disaster Resource Network 139
8.11 Im plementation Strategy and Time-Frame 140
9 Implementation of the Guidelines:
Preparation of Cyclone DM Plans 142
9.2 Implementing the Guidelines 143
9.3 Implementation and Coordination at the National Level 143
9.4 Institutional Mechanism and Coordination at State and District Levels 144
9.5 Financial Arrangements for Implementation 144
24 April 2008 PVSM, UYSM, A VSM (Retd)
India has a coastline of 7,516 km, of which 5,700 km are prone to cyclones of various degrees.
About eight per cent of the Country’s area and one-third of it’s population live in 13 coastal states and
UTs who are, thus vulnerable to cyclone related disasters. Loss of lives, livelihood opportunities, damage
to public and private property and severe damage to infrastructure are the resultant consequences,
which can disrupt the process of development. Climate change and the resultant sea-level rise is also
likely to exacerbate the seriousness of this problem in the coming decades.
The National Guidelines for the Management of Cyclones have been formulated after a ‘nine step’
process taking on board completely, various Central Ministries, Departments, States and UTs. The
process also included wide consultations with scientific and technical institutions, academics, technocrats
and humanitarian organisations. The draft guidelines document was circulated to all the Ministries/
Departments at the Centre and the States and UTs for their feedback. All workable suggestions have
These guidelines call for a participatory approach involving all stakeholder groups to strengthen the
national vision of moving towards a more proactive pre-disaster preparedness and mitigation-centric
approach. These contain all the details that are required by planners and implementers and will help in
the preparation of plans by the Central Ministries/Departments and the States/UTs.
A National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project of approximately Rs. 1,600 crore, with assistance from
the World Bank, is in the process of finalization, covering all the 13 coastal States/UTs. The various
activities under this project will include construction of cyclone shelters, shelter belt/mangrove plantations,
establishing last mile connectivity, improving link roads, etc. Once all the activities, as laid down in these
guidelines are implemented, we will be much better prepared to face the hazards of cyclones.
I am grateful to the members of the core group and coordinators and members of different sub-
groups who contributed to this effort. Finally, I am pleased to place on record my sincere appreciation
for Shri M. Shashidhar Reddy, MLA, Member, NDMA, who guided and coordinated the entire exercise.
I am thankful to the members of the Core Group and Sub Groups for their untiring efforts in helping
the NDMA in the formulation of the National Disaster Management Guidelines for the Management of
Cyclones. I must place on record my sincere appreciation of the special efforts made by Dr. K. J.
Ramesh, Adviser and Scientist (G), Ministry of Earth Sciences, New Delhi for his contribution and by
Dr. G. S. Mandal, (Retd. Addl. D.G., IMD), Specialist, NDMA.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to the representatives of all concerned central ministries
and departments, States/UTs, Ministry of Science and Technology and academic institutions for their
contribution. I also wish to thank the representatives of the corporate sectors, NGOs and other key
stakeholders for their valuable insights.
I am also happy to acknowledge the support extended by Dr. C.V . Dharma Rao, Mr. Srinivasulu
Gunda, Dr. Susanta Kumar Jena, Mr. Ch. Gangadhara Rao and Mr. A.C. Naveen Kumar during the
various workshops, meetings, video conferences and their assistance in the preparation of these Guidelines.
I also wish to acknowledge the support extended by Dr. P.K. Mishra, Former Secretary of NDMA, Shri
H.S. Brahma, Addl. Secretary, NDMA and other administrative staff of NDMA.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to General N.C. Vij, PVSM, UYSM, A VSM (Retd),
Vice Chairman, NDMA for his valuable guidance at various stages of the preparation of the Guidelines.
I must also acknowledge my gratitude to the distinguished Members of the NDMA for their valuable
insights, guidance and feedback from time to time.
New Delhi M. Shashidhar Reddy, MLA
ACTS Advanced Computational Testing and Simulation
ACWC Area Cyclone Warning Centre
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education
AMSU Advance Microwave Sounding Unit
APC Aircraft Probing of Cyclone facility
APC¹ Ar eas of Particular Concern
APHM & ECRP Andhra Pradesh Hazard Mitigation and Emergency Cyclone Recovery Project
APSDMS Andhra Pradesh State Disaster Mitigation Society
ARC Armoured Reconnaissance Aircraft
ASSOCHAM Associated C hambers of Commerce and Industry
ATI Administrative Training Institute
BARC Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards
BOOT Build Operate Own Transfer
BSNL Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
CBDM Comm unity Based Disaster Management
CBO Community Based Organization
CBRN Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Agencies
CCMNC Cabinet Committee on Management of Natural Calamities
CCS Cabinet Committee on Security
CDM Cyclone Disaster Management
CDMA Code Division Multiple Access
CDMC C yclone Distress Mitigation Committee
CDMIS Cyclone Disaster Management Information System
CERP C yclone Emergency Reconstruction Project
CESS Centre for Earth Science Studies
CEWS Cyclone Early Warning System
CGWA Central Ground Water Authority
CGWB Central Ground Water Board
CIDS Chief of the Integrated Defence Staff
CII Confederation of Indian Industry
CMC Crisis Management Committee
CPAP Continuous Positive Air Pressure
CPDAC Coastal Protection & Development Advisory Committee
CRMI Cyclone Risk Mitigation Investments
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
CSO Central Statistical Organisation
CWDS Cyclone Warning Dissemination System
DAMA Demand Assigned Multiple Access
DBT Department of Biotechnology
DCWDS Digital Cycl one Warning Dissemination System
DDMA D istrict Disaster Mitigation Authorities
DEOC District Emergency Operations Centre
DES Directorate of Economics and Statistics
DIT Department of Information Technology
DMIS Disaster Management Information System
DoT Department of Telecommunications
DPAD Data Processing and Application Development
DRDO Def ence Research and Development Organisation
DRMP Disaster Risk Management Programme
DST Department of Science & Technology
DVB-RCS Digital Video Broadcast with Return Carrier through Satellite
ECMWF European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasting
EGIA Ecologically and Geomorphologically Important Areas
EIA Environment Impact Assessment
EPA Environmental Protection Act, 1986
ERP Emergency Response Platform
ESCAP Unit ed Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia & Pacific
EWER Early Warning Emergency Response
FICCI Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
FTDMA Fr equency Time Division Multiple Access
GIS Geographical Information System
GPRS General Packet Radio Service
GSDMA Gujarat State Disaster Management Authority
GSDP Gr oss State Domestic Product
GSI Geological Survey of India
GSM Global System for Mobile Communications
GTS Global Telecommunication System
HDSS H azard Decision Support System
HLCC High Level Cabinet Committee
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ICMAM Integrated Coastal Area & Marine Management
ICRC International Committee on Red Cross
ICT Information and Communication Technology
ICZM Integrated Coastal Zone Management
IDKN India Disaster Knowledge Network
IDNDR Internati onal Decade of Natural Disaster Reduction
IDRN India Disaster Resource Network
IGNOU Ind ira Gandhi National Open University
IIT Indian Institute of Technology
IMD India Meteorological Department
INCOIS Indian Nati onal Centre for Ocean Information Services
INMARSAT International Maritime Satellite
IOC Integrated Operation Centre
ISDN Integrated Service Digital Network
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation
JMA Japan Meteorological Agency
JNNURM Jaw aharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
JTWC Joint Typhoon Warning Centre
LBSNAA Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
MCS Meso-scale Convective System
MDD Meteorological Data Distribution
MFTDMA Mu lti-Frequency Time Division Multiple Access
MHRD Mini stry of Human Resource Development
MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests
MoES Ministry of Earth Sciences
MoHFW Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
MoI&B Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
MoIT Ministry of Information Technology
MoRD Ministry of Rural Development
MoUD & PA Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation
MoWR Ministry of Water Resources
MPCS Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters
MSSRF M.S. Swaminat han Research Foundation
MTN Main Telecommunication Network
MTNL Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NAP National Afforestation Programme
NASA National Aeronautical and Space Administration
NATMO National Thematic Mapping Organization
NBSSLUP National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land-Use Planning
NCCF Nati onal Calamity Contingency Fund
NCDMI Nati onal Cyclone Disaster Management Institute
NCEP National Centre for Environmental Prediction
NCERT Nati onal Council of Educational Research and Training
NCMC Nati onal Crisis Management Committee
NCMRWF N ational Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
NCPP National Coastal Protection Project
NCRMF National Cyclone Risk Management Facility
NCRMP Nati onal Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project
NCST N ational Committee of Science & Technology
NCZP National Coastal Zone Policy
NDCI Nati onal Disaster Communication Infrastructure
NDEM Nati onal Database for Emergency Management
NDM National Disaster Management
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority
NDMR National Disaster Mitigation Reserve
NDMRC National Disaster Mitigation Resource Centre
NDRF National Disaster Response Force
NEC National Executive Committee
NeGP Nati onal e-Governance Plan
NEP National Environment Policy
NHMIS Natu ral Hazards Management Informatics Program of NIC
NIC National Informatics Centre
NIDM National Institute of Disaster Management
NIOT National Institute of Ocean Technology
NIRD National Institute of Rural Development
NISA National Industrial Security Academy
NMS Network Management Software
NMTN National Meteorological Telecommunication Network
NRSA National Remot e Sensing Agency
NSDI National Spatial Data Infrastructure
NSSO Nati onal Sample Survey Organisation
NTRO National Thematic Research Organisation
NFVM Nati onal Forest Vegetation Map
NWP Numerical Weather Prediction
NWSTG National Weather Service Telecommunications Gateway
NYKS N ehru Yuvak Kendra Sangathan
OSDMA Ori ssa State Disaster Mitigation Authority
PMSS Probable Maximum Storm Surge
PPP Public-Private Partnership
PRI Panchayati Raj Institution
PSDN Pub lic Switched Data Network
PSTN Public Swit ched Telephone Network
PVA Participatory Vulnerability Assessment
RMTN Regional Meteorological Telecommunication Network
RSMC Regional Specialised Meteorological Centre
RTH Regional Telecommunication Hub
SACC Scien tific Advisory Committee to the Cabinet
SCPC Singl e Channel per Carrier
SCS Satellite Communication System
SDMA State Disaster Management Authorities
SDRF State Disaster Response Force
SDSS Spatial Decision Support System
SEOC State Emergency Operations Centre
SERC S tructural Engineering Research Centre
SFR State of the Forest Report
SHIFOR Statistical Hurricane Intensity Forecast
SHIPS Statistical Hurricane Intensity Prediction Scheme
SIRD State Institute of Rural Development
SOPs Standard Operating Procedures
SRSA Stat e Remote Sensing Agency
SSM/I Special Sensor Microwave/Imager
STIFOR Statistical Typhoon Intensity Forecast
TIPS Typhoon Intensity Prediction Scheme
TRAI Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
TRMM Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission
UGC University Grants Commission
UKMO United Kingdom Meteorological Office
USWS United States Weather Service
VIC Village Information Centre
VSAT Very Small Aperture Terminal
VSS Vana Samrakshana Samithies
WMO World Meteorological Organisation
ZSI Zoological Survey of India
The tidal levels and character which would result from gravitational effects, e.g., of the Earth, Sun and
Moon, without any atmospheric influences.
The measurement of depth of water in oceans, seas and lakes; also information derived from such
Are also used to define probability distribution for characteristics of tropical cyclones (e.g., forward
motion and intensity) in a risk model.
Breakwaters are structures placed offshore to dissipate the energy of incoming waves. The breakwaters
are smaller structures, placed one to three hundred feet offshore in relatively shallow water, designed to
protect a gently sloping beach.
A high, steep face of rock; a precipice.
A notable physiographic feature of salt marshes, especially low marshes, in the development of tidal
creeks in the marsh itself. These creeks develop, as do rivers, ‘with minor irregularities sooner or later
causing the water to be deflected into definite channels’.
A weather system consisting of an area of low pressure, in which winds circulate at speeds exceeding
61 km/hr, also known as ‘Cyclone’ or Tropical Storm. These are non-frontal synoptic scale weather systems
originating over tropical waters with organized convention and definite cyclonic surface wind circulation.
Winds rotate around the low pressure centre in an anti-clockwise direction in the Northern Hemisphere
and in a clockwise direction in the Southern Hemisphere.
Generation of hazard maps in respect of habitation of different infrastructure, housing and crop damages
based on the cyclone wind distribution of storm surge and heavy rainfall along the cyclone track starting
Depression (low pressure area)
Region where the barometric pressure is lower relative to that in the surrounding regions at the same
level and wind speed in circulation is between 17 and 27 knot (31 and 49 kmph).
A radar capable of measuring the change in frequency of a radar wave caused by the relative motion of
an object in the atmosphere within the area of radar coverage. Doppler capabilities are not used in the
process of converting radar echoes to precipitation estimates.
The population, properties, economic activities, including public services, etc. at risk in a given area.
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
Studies undertaken in order to assess the effect on a specified environment of the introduction of any
new factor, which may upset the current ecological balance.
An estuary is a semi-enclosed coastal body of water which has a free connection with the open sea and
within which sea water is measurably diluted with fresh water derived from ‘land drainage’.
Organised, phased and supervised dispersal of people from dangerous or potentially dangerous areas.
A term used for the centre of a cyclone. It is the point where the wind rotates in a counter-clockwise
direction. In the centre of eye the wind is calm or slight and rainfall and cloudiness is nil or light.
Wind with a speed between 34 and 40 knots (Beaufort scale wind force 8).
A knot is a unit of speed and used around the world for maritime and aviation purposes. 1 international
knot = 1 nautical mile per hour = 1.852 kilometres per hour.
A point on the land where a cyclone just crosses the coast.
Branch of physical and socio-economic planning that determines the means and assesses the values or
limitations of various options in which land is to be utilized, with the corresponding effects on different
segments of the population or interests of a community taken into account in resulting decisions.
Period of a particular hazard between its announcement and arrival.
Mangroves are basically halophytic trees, shrubs, and other plants growing on sheltered shores, typically
on tidal flats, deltas, estuaries, bays, creeks and the barrier islands. The best locations are where
abundant silt and fresh water is brought down by rivers or on the backshore of accreting sandy beaches.
Non-engineered measures to reduce or avoid possible impacts of hazards such as education, training,
capacity development, public awareness, early warning, hazard vulnerability risk analysis, communication,
Principle adopted by the UN Conference on thr Environment and Development (1992) that in order to
protect the environment, a precautionary approach should be widely applied, meaning that where there
are threats of serious or irreversible damage to the environment, lack of full scientific certainty should not
be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.
This principle allows action to be taken to protect the environment at an early stage.
Radar (Radi o Detection and Ranging)
System to assist in determining at a single station, the direction and distance of an object.
A balloon-borne instrument that measures meteorological parameters from the Earth’s surface up to 20
miles or more in the atmosphere. The radiosonde measures temperature, pressure and humidity and
transmits or ‘radios’ these data back to Earth. Upper air winds also are determined through tracking of
The technology of acquiring data and information about objects or phenomena with the help of a device
that is not in physical contact with it. In other words, remote sensing refers to gathering information
about the Earth and its environment from a distance, a critical capability of the Earth Observing System.
The capacity of a system to tolerate perturbation or disturbances without collapsing into a qualitatively
different state; to withstand shock and rebuild when necessary.
The principal purpose of emergency response is the preservation of life and property. Response is
defined as the ‘actions taken in anticipation of, during, and immediately after an emergency to ensure
that its effects are minimised, and that people affected are given immediate relief and support’.
The process of identifying high-risk areas by correlating a hazard to the terrain and to the probability of
occurrence. The results of these analyses are usually presented in the form of risk maps which show the
type and degree of hazard represented by a natural phenomenon at a given geographic location.
Rainwater that flows over the land and into streams and lakes; it often picks up soil particles along the
way and transports it to streams and lakes.
It is an abnormal rise in the level of water along a shore, primarily as a result of the high winds and low
pressures generated with tropical cyclones; generally affects only coastal areas but may intrude some
Any physical construction to reduce or avoid possible impact of hazards, which include engineering
measures and construction of hazard-resistant and protective structures and infrastructure.
A series of large waves generated by sudden displacement of seawater (caused by earthquake, volcanic
eruption or submarine landslide); capable of propagation over large distances and causing a destructive
surge on reaching land. The Japanese term for this phenomenon, which is observed mainly in the
Pacific, has been adopted for general usage.
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAVs)
For collecting special observations from the core cyclone environment in addition to the data collected
from land, ocean and space-based observational platforms for facilitating improved cyclone early warning.
A vegetated eco-system where water is a dominant factor in its development and existence.
In general, it is the subdivision of a geographical entity (country, region, etc.) into homogenous sectors
with respect to certain criteria (for example, intensity of the hazard, degree of risk, same overall protection
against a given hazard, etc.).
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 (DM Act,
2005) lays down institutional and coordination
mechanism for effective Disaster Management (DM)
at the national, state, district and local levels. As
mandated by this Act, the Government of India (GoI)
created a multi-tiered institutional system consisting
of the National Disaster Management Authority
(NDMA) headed by the Prime Minister, the State
Disaster Management Authorities (SDMAs) by the
respective Chief Ministers and the District Disaster
Management Authorities (DDMAs) by the District
Collectors and co-chaired by Chairpersons of the
local bodies. These bodies have been set up to
facilitate a paradigm shift from the hitherto relief-
centric approach to a more proactive, holistic and
integrated approach of strengthening disaster
preparedness, mitigation and emergency response.
Soon after the NDMA was set up, a series of
consultations were initiated with various stakeholders
to facilitate the development of guidelines for
strengthening cyclone disaster management. Senior
representatives from government departments and
agencies, academics, professionals and
representatives of multilateral and humanitarian
agencies and the corporate sector participated in
these meetings. These meetings acknowledged
several initiatives taken up by government agencies
in the recent past which are significant and have
far-reaching consequences. They also highlighted
the need for a holistic and integrated strategy. On
the basis of these deliberations, the NDMA has
prepared these Guidelines for the Management of
Cyclones (hereinafter referred to as the Guidelines)
to assist ministries and departments of GoI and
state governments to prepare their DM plans.
Cyclone Vulnerability in India
A long coastline of about 7,516 km of flat
coastal terrain, shallow continental shelf, high
population density, geographical location and
physiological features of its coastal areas makes
India, in the North Indian Ocean (NIO) Basin,
extremely vulnerable to cyclones and its associated
hazards like storm tide (the combined effects of
storm surge and astronomical tide), high velocity
Though the frequency of Tropical Cyclones (TCs)
in the NIO covering the Bay of Bengal and the
Arabian Sea is the least in the world (7% of the
global total), their impact on the east coast of India
as well as the Bangladesh coast is relatively more
devastating. This is evident from the fact that in
the last 270 years, 21 of the 23 major cyclones (with
a loss of about 10,000 lives or more) worldwide
occurred over the area surrounding the Indian
subcontinent (India and Bangladesh). This is
primarily due to the serious storm tide effect in the
Thirteen coastal states and Union Territories (UTs)
in the country, encompassing 84 coastal districts,
are affected by tropical cyclones. Four states (Tamil
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and West Bengal)
and one UT (Puducherry) on the east coast and one
state (Gujarat) on the west coast are more
vulnerable to hazards associated with cyclones.
About 8% of the area in the country is prone to
cyclone-related disasters. Recurring cyclones
account for large number of deaths, loss of
livelihood opportunities, loss of public and private
property and severe damage to infrastructure, thus
seriously reversing developmental gains at regular
Broad-scale assessment of the population at
risk suggests that an estimated 32 crore people,
which accounts for almost a third of the country’s
total population, are vulnerable to cyclone-
related hazards. Climate change and its
resultant sea-level rise can significantly increase
the vulnerability of the coastal population.
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project
The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project
(NCRMP), to be implemented with financial
assistance from the World Bank, is envisaged to
• Component A: Improvement of early
warning dissemination system by
strengthening the Last Mile Connectivity
(LMC) of cyclone warnings and advisories.
• Component B: Cyclone risk mitigation
• Component C: Technical assistance for
hazard risk management and capacity-
• Component D: Project management and
These components are highly interdependent
and have to be implemented in a coherent manner.
The planned framework of activities under this
project provides end-to-end solutions for effective
Cyclone Disaster Management (CDM) in all the 13
A paradigm shift in the approach to DM
proceeds from the conviction that development
cannot be sustainable unless disaster mitigation is
built into the developmental process. The
cornerstone of the approach is that mitigation has
to be multi-sectoral. It has been universally accepted
that returns on mitigation investments are very high.
Developing appropriate coping strategies and risk
reduction plans, along with greater public
awareness, is the high priority agenda for disaster
management in India. This will have to be based
i) Enhancing national, state, district and local-
level advocacy partnerships and knowledge
management for mainstreaming disaster
ii) Developing hazard risk management tools,
These guidelines are an important step towards
the development of plans for the management of
cyclones and their attendant disasters. These have
been prepared to provide guidance to the ministries,
departments and state authorities for the preparation
of their detailed DM plans. These guidelines call
for a proactive, participatory, well-structured, fail-
safe, multi-disciplinary and multi-sector approach
The guidelines are presented in nine chapters
i) Chapter 1 provides an introductory overview
that reflects the risk and vulnerability of the
country to cyclones, including the
dimensions and magnitude of the problem.
ii) Chapter 2 discusses the Early Warning
Systems (EWS) for cyclones. In this chapter,
the present status of EWSs has been
discussed and the gaps have been
identified. Requirement to bring them up to
international standards and making them
state-of-the-art systems has been
iii) Chapt er 3 deals with the present status of
Dissemination, its gaps and future
improvements required towards making it
iv) Chapter 4 covers structural measures for
preparedness and mitigation, covering
cyclone shelters, buildings, road links,
culverts and bridges, canals, drains, saline
embankments surface water tanks, cattle
mounds and communication/power
v) In Chapter 5, important aspects of the
management of coastal zones and its
relevance to CDM, including some other
non-structural mitigation options have been
presented. This chapter discusses issues
related to coastal zone management,
sustainability of coastal resources, bio-
shields, coastal flood plain management,
coastal erosion, natural resources
vi) Chapter 6 deals with various aspects of
awareness generation related to CDM as
an important preparedness measure.
vii) Chapter 7 covers Disaster Risk Management
(DRM) issues, risk assessment and
vulnerability analysis, hazard zoning and
mapping, data generation, including the use
of GIS tools, and capacity development.
viii) Chapter 8 deals with CDM-related response
and relief strategies. A detailed account of
several issues related to effective response
such as response platforms, linking risk
knowledge with response planning, evolving
disaster response capabilities, etc., is
ix) In Chapter 9, guidelines and implementation
strategies have been discussed. Other
supportive mechanisms for effective
implementation of guidelines such as
preparation of DM and vulnerability reduction
action plans, coordination at all levels of
government, mobilization of financial
resources and implementation methodology,
Major Action Points are listed at the end of each
chapter. The following are some of the salient
initiatives recommended for implementation as part
of the National Guidelines for Management of
1. Establishing a state-of-the-art cyclone EWS
involving observations, predictions,
warnings and customised local-scale advice
for decision-makers (national/state/district
level) for managing the impact of cyclones.
[Action: Ministry of Earth Sciences
Department (IMD) with academic and
R&D institutions; Operations Centre
(OC) of the NDMA/MHA] [Time-frame:
2. Commissioning of Aircraft Probing of
Cyclone (APC) facility for India with a
combination of manned aircraft and high
altitude Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV)
which can effectively fill the critical
observational data gaps in the case of
cyclones over the Bay of Bengal and the
Arabian Sea to a great extent. An actual
flight by an aircraft into and around the
tropical cyclone during various stages of its
development and movement can provide
invaluable data for studying and
understanding the structure and movement
of a cyclone, thus reducing track and
intensity prediction errors significantly.
(MoES)—IMD, Ministry of Defence—
Indian Air Force/ Indian Navy;
Department of Space (DoS)—National
[Time-Frame: 2008–09 to 2011–12]
3. Commissioning of the National Disaster
Communication Infrastructure (NDCI) at the
NDMA/MHA, State Disaster Management
Authorities (SDMAs) of coastal states/UTs
and District Disaster Management
Authorities (DDMAs) of the 84 coastal
districts vulnerable to cyclones with the
adoption of state-of-the-art operational
infrastructure covering the following:
i) High End Computing (scalable 30–50
Teraflops peak performance), Storage
(800 Terabytes) and Communication
ii) 3-D Virtual Reality Visual Studio;
iii) Cen tralised Comprehensive Databank
for Cyclone Risk Management with
nodes in various coastal states over a
fail-safe communication backbone
between the OCs of NDMA, SDMAs
and DDMAs (for Information and Data
Fusion involving collating, analysing,
interpreting, translating and monitoring
departments based on state-of-the-art
scientific and technological know-how);
iv) Comprehensive state-of-the-art OC for
effective coordination of Disaster
Response Actions at the state and local
[Action: Operations Centres (OC) of
NDMA; Ministry of Home Affairs
Department of Space (DoS); Ministry
Technology (DST—National Spatial
Data Infrastructure (NSDI)] [Time-
4. Expanding the warning dissemination
outreach by using the services of Direct-To-
Home (DTH) transmission in remote and rural
areas (Panchayats) which cannot be
otherwise covered, to introduce weather
channel and broadcast cyclone warnings
from high-power coastal radio stations
including the use of satellite radio service
like World Space, Ham radios, community
[Action: Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting (MoI&B); Ministry of
Earth Sciences (MoES)] [Time-Frame:
5. The following specific actions will be carried
out for taking structural measures for cyclone
i) Structural safety of lifeline infrastructure
ii) Establishing a robust system of
locating multi-purpose cyclone shelters
iii) Ensuring cyclone resistant design
standards are incorporated in the rural/
urban housing schemes in coastal
iv) Building all-weather road links to all
habitations and cyclone shelters/cattle
v) Maintaining the full designed carrying
capacity of main drains and canals
along with feeder primary/secondary/
tertiary channels, creating additional
flood flow canals in frequently
vi) Construction of saline embankments
to prevent ingress of saline water
associated with cyclonic storm
vii) Encouraging public-private partnership
Development and Poverty Alleviation;
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS);
Planning, Municipal Administration,
Authorities; Planning Boards of
Coastal States and UTs] [Time-Frame:
6. Actions for effective cyclone risk reduction
through management of coastal zones
i) Mapping and delineation of coastal
wetlands, patches of mangroves and
shelterbelts, identification of potential
zones for expanding bio-shield spread
based on remote sensing tools.
ii) Regulating infrastructure and
development activities in coastal zones.
iii) M onitoring of water quality as well as
the carrying and assimilative capacities
of open waters with institutionalised
iv) Developing Integrated Coastal Zone
Management (ICZM) frameworks for
addressing the sustainability and
optimal utilisation of coastal resources
as also cyclone impact minimisation
v) Evolving eco-system restoration plans
for degraded ecological zones.
vi) Developing delta water management
and freshwater recharge/management
vii) Coastal bio-shields spread,
viii) Implementing coastal flood zoning,
flood plain development and flood
inundation management and regulatory
ix) Groundwater development and
requirement in coastal urban centres.
x) Development of Aquaculture Parks in
the identified potential zones.
[Action: Ministry of Environment and
Forests (MoEF); Department of Space
(DoS); Ministry of Water Resources
(MoWR), Coastal States and UTs;
(SRSAs); Coastal Area Development,
and Irrigation and Command Area
Development Authorities; Central and
7. Setting up of an exclusive eco-system
monitoring network to study the impact of
of Earth Sciences (MoES); Institutions
under the Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR); Technical
and Scientific Institutions under the
Governments of Coastal States and
8. Developing integrated hazard mitigation
framework taking into account cyclone and
associated storm surge, wind hazard,
rainfall-runoff, river flood and Geographical
Information System (GIS) models for
estimating possible areas of inundation
along with the depth of inundation (levels),
possible damage to infrastructure, crops,
houses, etc., evaluating not only the
vulnerability but also the changing profile of
vulnerability from time to time.
(MoES); Ministry of Water Resources
Management Departments of Coastal
States and UTs] [Time-Frame: 2008–
9. Integrate ongoing efforts of the Survey of
India, Department of Space under National
Spatial Data Infrastructure, National
Database for Emergency Management and
MoEF initiatives for speedy completion of
digital spatial data generation to cover 84
coastal districts that are vulnerable to
cyclones, for evolving holistic cyclone risk
reduction strategies on priority. High
resolution (at least 0.5 m interval) coastal
Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) are to be
developed for micro-scale delineation of
cyclone risk, hazard and vulnerability.
[Action: Department of Science and
Technology (DST); Survey of India
(SoI); Department of Space (DoS);
National Database for Emergency
Management (NDEM); National Spatial
Data Infrastructure (NSDI); Ministry of
Environment and Forests (MoEF);
(SRSAs); Technical and Scientific
Institutions of Coastal States and UTs]
[Time-Frame: 2008–09 to 2009–12]
10. Augmentation of additional surveys by the
Census Commissioner will be carried out
for generating household, disaster specific
[Action: Ministry of Planning and
Programme Implementation; Central
Statistical Organisation (CSO),
National Sample Survey Organisation
(NSSO); Directorates of Economics
and Statistics (DES) in Coastal States
and UTs] [Time-Frame: 2008–09 to
11. Establishing a comprehensive Cyclone
Disaster Management Information System
(CDMIS) covering all phases of DM to
provide on-line services to the departments
of Disaster Management in the states.
[Action: Directorates of Economics
Departments of Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT)
Planning, Coastal Area Development
Development Authorities, State
Remote Sensing Agencies (SRSAs),
Disaster Management Departments of
12. Specifying the roles and responsibilities of
Departments in institutionalising Cyclone
Risk Mitigation with Developmental
[Action: State Disaster Management
Authorities (SDMAs) in Coastal States
13. Launching Community Based Disaster
Management (CBDM) activities similar to
the DRM Project initiatives of MHA in all
villages of the 84 districts vulnerable to
cyclones that have not yet been covered.
[Action: SDMAs in Coastal States and
UTs] [Time-Frame: 2008–09 to 2011–
14. NCDMI will be established as an exclusive
institutional set-up in one of the coastal
states to address all issues related to
cyclone risk. NDMA will conceptualise the
entire project. NCDMI will involve
stakeholders from the government and the
community, focusing on preparedness,
mitigation, response, rehabilitation and
recovery. It will bridge the gap in the
integration of disaster related technical
support of all the concerned departments/
ministries of the Central Government with
those of the states/UTs and local authorities.
It will serve as a platform for all academics
and S&T institutions to synergise their efforts
to offer better disaster risk reduction options.
Operations Centres (OCs) of Ministry
of Home Affairs (MHA); Ministry of
Technology (DST)—SoI; DoS-NRSA;
15. Institutionalising specific Emergency
Response (ER) Actions for Cyclone Disaster
Figure 1 (a): Cyclone Frequency and Wind Hazard Map
Figure 1 (b): Cyclone Wind Hazard and PMSS Map
1.1.1 Tropical Cyclone (TC), also known as
‘Cyclone’ is the term used globally to cover tropical
weather systems in which winds equal or exceed
‘gale force’ (minimum of 34 knot, i.e., 62 kmph).
These are intense low pressure areas of the earth-
atmosphere coupled system and are extreme
weather events of the tropics.
1.1.2 India has a coastline of about 7,516 km,
5,400 km along the mainland, 132 km in
Lakshadweep and 1,900 km in the Andaman and
Nicobar Islands. Although the North Indian Ocean
(NIO) Basin (including the Indian coast) generates
only about 7% of the world’s cyclones, their impact
is comparatively high and devastating, especially
when they strike the coasts bordering the North Bay
1.1.3 The frequency of cyclones in the NIO Basin
is bi-modal, which is specific to this region.
Cyclones occur in the months of May–June and
October–November, with their primary peak in
November and secondary peak in May.
1.1.4 Tropical cyclones generally originate in the
eastern side of the NIO Basin and initially move in a
west-north westerly direction. More cyclones form
in the Bay of Bengal than in the Arabian Sea and
the ratio is 4:1. It has been observed that between
1891 and 2006, 308 cyclones crossed the east
coast, out of which 103 were severe. Less cyclonic
activity was observed on the west coast during the
same period, with 48 cyclones crossing the west
coast, out of which 24 were of severe intensity.
1.1.5 Tropical cyclones are characterised by
destructive winds, storm surges and very heavy
rainfall, each one having its own impact on human
and livestock, and their activities. Of these, storm
surge is responsible for 90% of the loss of lives
associated with cyclone disaster. Past records of
destructive cyclones (human deaths numbering
around 10,000 and above) are given in Table 1.1.
This list does not include TCs which have caused
severe loss to properties (such as ‘Katrina’ in USA
in 2005 which has resulted in economic losses of
about US$ 82 billion) or the severest TC ever
recorded in terms of intensity (‘Typhoon Tip’ in the
Pacific Ocean). However, it has been observed
the world over that even though damage to property
is continuously increasing loss of life shows a
declining trend. This is because of improved
early warning system and dissemination,
various risk reduction measures, preparedness,
mitigation measures and improved response
1.1.6 It can be seen that since 1737, 21 of the 23
major cyclone disasters (in terms of loss of lives) in
the world have occurred over the Indian subcontinent
(India and Bangladesh). Tropical cyclones in the
Bay of Bengal striking the east coast of India and
Bangladesh usually produce a higher storm surge
as compared to elsewhere in the world because of
the special nature of the coastline, shallow coastal
bathymetry and characteristics of tides. Their coastal
impact is significant because of the low flat coastal
terrain, high density of population, low awareness
of the community, inadequate response and
preparedness and absence of any hedging
NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES: MANAGEMENT OF CYCLONES
1.1.7 There are 13 coastal states and union
territories (UTs) in the country, encompassing 84
coastal districts which are affected by tropical
cyclones. Four states (Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Orissa and West Bengal) and one UT (Puducherry)
on the east coast and one state (Gujarat) on the
west coast are highly vulnerable to cyclone
disasters. The details of cyclones which crossed
the coastal districts of India during the period 1891–
2006, is presented in Table 1.2.
1.2.1 Cyclones are atmospheric and oceanic
phenomena. Listed below are some of the
favourable conditions identified through
Source: CRC Report; HPC Report; IMD Publications.
*Population affected 15,681,072.
Table 1.1 Major Tropical Cyclone Disasters during the past 270 Years in terms of Human Loss
(with Human Deaths 10,000 or more)
observational facts and scientific studies for the
formation of TCs. The weightage of individual
conditions is, however, yet unknown.
i) A warm sea surface (temperature in excess
of 26 o–27oC) and associated warming
extending up to a depth of 60m with
abundant water vapour in the overlying air
ii) High relative humidity in the atmosphere up
to a height of about 5,000 metres,
Table 1.2 Number of Cyclones crossing various Coastal Districts of the East and West Coasts
of India during the Period 1891– 2002
Source: IMD:2002: Damage Potential of TC
iii) At mospheric instability that encourages the
formation of massive vertical cumulus
clouds due to condensation of rising moist
iv) Low vertical wind shear between the lower
and higher levels of the atmosphere that do
not allow the heat generated and released
by the clouds to get transported from the
area (vertical wind shear is the rate of
change of wind between the higher and
lower levels of the atmosphere),
v) The presence of cyclonic vorticity (rate of
rotation of air) that initiates and favours
rotation of the air cyclonically, and
vi) Location over the ocean, at least 4–5
1.2.2 Within the cyclone field, strong winds blow
around the low pressure centre in an anticlock-wise
direction in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise
in Southern Hemisphere, though the wind at the
centre (known as eye of the cyclone) is very little
and generally free from cloud and rain. Winds
increase rapidly to its peak (often exceeding 150
km/h) at about 20 to 30 km from the centre and
thereafter decrease gradually to become normal
around 300 to 500 km away. Cyclones vary in
diameter from 100 to 1,000 km but their effect
dominates over thousands of square kilometres over
the ocean as well as along the coast. The
powerhouse is located within a 100 km radius of
the eye of the cyclone where very strong winds,
sometimes more than 250 km per hour, can be
generated in a narrow zone beyond the eye
1.3.1 The frequency of cyclonic disturbances that
formed in the Bay of Bengal between 1891 and
Source: India Meteorological Department.
Table 1.3 Various Types of Cyclonic Disturbances formed in the Bay of Bengal Affecting the
East Coast of India between 1891 and 2000
1.4.1 Cyclones are known by many names the world over—typhoons in the North West Pacific including
the South China Sea, hurricanes in the North Atlantic including the West Indies and in the Caribbean Sea
and the North East Pacific, the aboriginal name of Willy-Willies in North-Western Australia and TCs in the
1.4.2 Though TCs differ by name across regions, they are classified according to their wind speed.
The classification, however, varies from region to region. The Indian classification of these intense low
pressure systems (cyclonic disturbances) is shown in Table 1.4.
Table 1.4 Indian Classification of Cyclonic Disturbances in the North Indian Ocean (Bay of
1.4.3 In the US, cyclones are classified into five different categories on the basis of their wind speed
as measured on the Saffir-Simpson scale. This classification is given in Table 1.5.
Table 1.5 Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale
Source: National Weather Services (NWS), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Note: Tropical Storms: winds 39–73 mph (34–63 kt)
1.5.1 Cyclones are characterized by their
destructive potential to damage structures such as
houses, lifeline infrastructure such as power and
communication towers, hospitals, food storage
facilities, roads, bridges, culverts, crops, etc., due
1.5.2 Exceptionally heavy rainfall causes
flooding. Storm surge inundates low-lying areas in
the coastal areas resulting in loss of life and
destruction of property, besides eroding beaches
and embankments, destroying vegetation and
1.5.3 The dangerous dimension of cyclone
disasters over the Indian subcontinent is evident
from the figures in Table 1.1 showing the number
of deaths due to cyclone disasters from 1737
onwards. Besides the loss of lives and livestock,
cyclones have high destructive potential due to the
strong winds that damage structures, and heavy
rainfall which causes floods and storm surge that
inundates low-lying coastal areas.
1.5.4 Although it is not possible to completely
avoid natural disasters, their effects can be
minimised by taking some known long- and short-
term structural and non-structural mitigation
measures such as developing proper early warning
systems, creating awareness at all levels in the
concerned communities, coastal afforestation,
construction of shelters, embankments, dykes,
coastal roads, bridges, canals, etc., through better
preparedness, mitigation measures and improved
1.6 Naming of Tropical Cyclones
1.6.1 Tropical cyclones are named to enable easy
identification and to eliminate confusion when there
are multiple systems in any individual basin at the
same time, and to assist people to identify the
system from which danger is most imminent. In
most cases, TCs retain their names throughout their
life; however, under special circumstances, TCs
may be renamed while active. These names are
taken from lists which vary from region to region
and are selected a few years earlier. The list is
decided upon, depending on the region, either by
committees of the World Meteorological
Organisation (WMO) or by national weather offices
(IMD in India) involved in the forecasting of cyclones.
Each year, the names of highly destructive cyclones
are ‘retired’, to be replaced by new ones.
1.7.1 Storm surge, which is a coastal phenomena,
is the inherent catastrophic feature of cyclones the
world over. The degree of disaster potential
depends on the storm surge amplitude associated
with the cyclone at the time of landfall,
characteristics of the coast, phases of the tides
and vulnerability of the area and community. The
world’s highest recorded storm tide was about 12.5
m (about 41 ft) and it was associated with the
Backergunj cyclone in 1876 near the Meghna estuary
in present-day Bangladesh. A storm tide of closer
magnitude (12.1 m) was also observed in West
Bengal at the mouth of the Hooghly River in
association with a severe cyclone in October 1737.
When a cyclone approaches the coast, the right
forward sector of the cyclone experiences wind
from ocean to land (on-shore wind) which pushes
the sea water towards the coast and finally appears
as storm surge. The direction of the wind on the
left forward sector of the cyclone is from land to
ocean (off-shore wind) which pushes the water from
the coast towards the ocean producing even
1.7.2 As explained at the outset, although the
impact of cyclones is generally devastating over
the coastal areas of West Bengal and Orissa,
bordering the North Bay of Bengal, the effects of
cyclones are also pronounced in the states/UT of
Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu/Puducherry. On
the west coast, Gujarat is the most vulnerable state.
1.7.3 The Probable Maximum Storm Surge
(PMSS) is the highest along the West Bengal coast
where it ranges from 9–12.5 m. It reduces to about
3.8 m in Khurda district, Orissa, increasing again
to about 8.2 m along the south Andhra Pradesh
coast in Krishna, Guntur and Prakasam districts. A
small region in south Tamil Nadu around
Nagapattinam coast also has higher PMSS of about
8.4 m. Along the west coast, the PMSS varies from
about 2 m near Thiruvananthapuram to around 5 m
near the Gulf of Khambat in the Saurashtra region
1.7.4 The super cyclone of October 1999
generated a wind speed of 252 km/h with an
ensuing surge of 7–9m close to Paradip in Orissa
which caused unprecedented inland inundation up
to 35 km from the coast. It is worth noting that, at
times, persistent standing water was identified in
the satellite imageries even 11 days after the cyclone
landfall, as it happened in the Krishna delta in May
1990 and in several other instances. The Andhra
Pradesh cyclone in 1977 which hit Divi Seema also
generated winds exceeding 250 km per hour.
1.8.1 The Vulnerability Atlas of India (1997)
contains cyclone hazard maps for the country as a
whole, depicting the vulnerability of states/UTs to
1.8.2 Vulnerability to natural disasters like
cyclones can be conceptualised as the exposure
to hazard (cyclone) and coping capacity of the
people, and the institutional support (e.g., early
warning systems and capacity-building) to adapt
and reduce adverse impacts. This coping capacity
also includes defence mechanisms and access to
resources (e.g., education and infrastructure) as well
as emergency response systems.
1.8.3 Broad scale assessment of the population
at risk suggests that an estimated 32 crore people,
total population, are vulnerable to cyclone-related
hazards. Climate change and its resultant sea-level
rise can significantly increase the vulnerability of
1.8.4 Further, analysis combining storm risk and
poverty suggests that Orissa is most vulnerable
due to its low coping capacity (per capita income
of Rs 6,767 and cyclonic vulnerability). Tamil Nadu,
Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal are also
vulnerable because they lie in the high cyclone
hazard zones and also have low per capita incomes.
Maharashtra and Goa are the two states which are
also affected by cyclones but they are less vulnerable
as cyclones are less frequent and people living there
have better coping capacity because of higher
incomes (per capita income is more than Rs
A list of various coastal districts and their broad-
scale vulnerability is provided overleaf in Table 1.6.
1.8.5 Cyclone wind hazard along with probable
maximum storm surges for coastal districts of India
are shown in Fig. 1(a) & (b). [Reference: Building
Material Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC),
1.9 Past Initiatives: National Level
1.9.1 Following the extensive damage caused by
two cyclones that struck Andhra Pradesh in 1969,
the Government of India (Ministry of Irrigation and
Power in consultation with the Ministry of Tourism
and Civil Aviation) appointed the Cyclone Distress
Mitigation Committee (CDMC) in 1970. The CDMC
was chaired by the then Director General of
Source: HPC Report, UNDP and NIDM
Legend: M – Medium; H – High; VH – Very High; FLZ – Flood Zone
Table 1.6 List of Vulnerable Districts for Cyclone Wind and Coastal/Inland Flooding
Observatories, Dr. P . Koteswaram of the IMD, to
review the mitigation efforts on cyclones.
1.9.2 The Committee submitted its report in May
1971 with 59 major recommendations comprising
installation and upgrading of the warning system;
demarcation of vulnerable areas; relief
preparedness; availability of drinking water;
restoration of the damaged infrastructure;
construction of cyclone shelters, bunds or
embankments; a model cyclone plan; cyclone
protection measures; educational awareness;
coordination committees from different groups; and
finally, a calamities fund. Even though this report
was directly concerned with the consequences of
cyclones for the Andhra Pradesh coast, many of
the recommendations were valid for other coastal
states/UTs vulnerable to cyclones.
1.9.3 Similar committees were also constituted
for the state of Orissa (1971) and West Bengal
(1974). The Tamil Nadu Government prepared an
anti-disaster plan to meet cyclone emergencies
1.9.4 After the November 1977 cyclone that
caused huge loss of life and property in Andhra
Pradesh, a Committee of Secretaries (CoS) of the
Government of India had discussed the issue to
find out the status of the implementation of the
recommendations of the CDMC in various coastal
states and to suggest remedies for any lacunae.
The Committee observed in May 1978 that many
important recommendations of the CDMC had not
been implemented till then. Subsequently, it made
its own recommendations and inter alia decided to
set up an Empowered Committee of Secretaries
with the aim of ensuring speedy implementation of
the recommendations of the CDMC and modify
1.9.5 After all these efforts, it was realised that
many aspects of cyclone management require
further infusion of latest science and technology
(S&T) developments for satisfactory solutions. In
1979, the Secretary of the Department of Science
and Technology (DST) brought the cyclone issues
to the notice of the National Committee of Science
and Technology (NCST) that was subsequently
named the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) to
the Prime Minister. The Secretary, DST, suggested
that a Cyclone Review Committee (CRC) should
be set up under the auspices of the NCST to carry
out a complete review of all aspects of cyclone
management. The CRC submitted its report along
1.9.6 Apart from some institutional arrangements
related to the operational issues of cyclone warning,
till date the major recommendations of the CRC
have not been implemented. One of the major
recommendations was to commission the Aircraft
Probing of Cyclone (APC) facility for India to generate
critical observations from the cyclone core environment.
1.9.7 A High Powered Committee (HPC) on
Disaster Management (DM) was constituted in 1999,
prior to the Orissa super cyclone, to prepare
comprehensive model plans for the management
of disasters at the national, state and district levels.
Based on its recommendations, state governments
have set up State Crisis Management Groups
headed by the chief secretaries, designated relief
commissioners and put in place state/district
contingency plans. A separate Calamity Relief Fund
(CRF) has been set up on the recommendation of
the IXth Finance Commission for each state where
75% of the fund is contributed by the central
government and the remaining is contributed by
the various state governments. It was also
recommended that Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
will be notified as the nodal ministry for overall
management of disasters which was finally done
in 2002 after the devastating Bhuj earthquake.
However, the Ministry of Agriculture continues to
be the nodal ministry for drought management.
Other ministries have been assigned the
responsibility of providing emergency support.
1.10 Paradigm Shift: Past Initiatives by
1.10.1 There have been some efforts in the past
by some of the most vulnerable states by taking up
institutionalised mitigation efforts. The first effort
was the World Bank-assisted Cyclone Emergency
Reconstruction Project (CERP) taken up by the
Government of Andhra Pradesh in 1990 itself
following the severe cyclone of May 1990. This is
referred to as one of the first initiatives heralding
the paradigm shift to a holistic approach of cyclone
risk management in the country.
1.10.2 In the aftermath of another devastating
cyclone that affected the north Andhra Pradesh
coast in 1996, the Government of Andhra Pradesh
has set up a separate Disaster Management Unit
(DMU) to implement the World Bank-funded Andhra
Pradesh Hazard Mitigation and Emergency Cyclone
Recovery Project (APHM & ECRP), and is currently
functioning as the Andhra Pradesh State Disaster
1.10.3 The Government of Orissa constituted the
Orissa State Disaster Mitigation Authority
(OSDMA), as a Government owned autonomous
body after the October 1999 super cyclone to have
a systematic and planned approach to disaster
management in the state with the objective of
making the people of the state more disaster
resilient. OSDMA coordinates various activities of
disaster mitigation in the state including capacity-
building of the community and disaster managers
and strengthening of infrastructure, improvement
1.10.4 The Government of Orissa has constituted
five units of Orissa Disaster Rapid Action Force
(ODRAF) which is specially trained and equipped
force to deal with cyclones and other disasters.
They are stationed at Jharsugda, Balasore, Cuttack,
Chhatrapur and Koraput. In addition to the other
modes of communication, Orissa has established
an extensive VHF network connecting different
levels of administration and the community to
communicate cyclone warnings and advisories.
Besides, the state government has undertaken several
initiatives for multi-hazard mitigation in the state.
1.10.5 In the aftermath of the Bhuj earthquake in
January 2001, a massive reconstruction programme
was launched by the Gujarat state government with
financial assistance from multi-lateral funding
agencies including the World Bank. The Gujarat State
Disaster Management Authority (GSDMA) was
established for the implementation of the
reconstruction programme. Further, GSDMA has
come out with a Composite Risk Atlas to help the
concerned departments of the state in disaster
mitigation planning in the areas most vulnerable to
natural and man-made hazards. The taluks most
vulnerable to cyclones have been mapped by
utilising Geographic Information System (GIS) tools.
1.11 Paradigm Shift in DM: Genesis of
1.11.1 In the i mmediate aftermath of the
December 2004 tsunami, the Government of India
took a far-reaching decision to set up an institutional
mechanism for effective DM with a vision to
transforming the approach toward DM in the
country. In March 2005, the Disaster Management
Bill was introduced in both houses of Parliament,
which became an Act in December 2005, after it
was adopted by Parliament. This initiative has been
hailed in all quarters as a defining moment in
attempting to organise a paradigm shift in DM. The
erstwhile relief-centric and post-event syndrome
was set to change to a well-orchestrated process
that focuses on the important but neglected areas
of prevention, mitigation, preparedness and more
robust and efficient measures for response,
1.11.2 The Disaster Management Act, 2005
1.11.2.1 This Act lays down the institutional, legal,
financial and coordination mechanism at the central,
state, district and local levels. These institutions
are not parallel structures, and will work in close
harmony. The institutional framework will ensure
implementation of the national will for a paradigm
shift in DM from a post-event and relief-centric
syndrome to a regime that lays greater emphasis
on preparedness, prevention and mitigation, leading
to a more prompt and effective response to disasters.
The institutional framework under the DM Act
includes the creation of NDMA at the national level,
SDMAs at state levels and DDMAs at district levels.
1.12.1 National Disaster Management
1.12.1.1 The National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA), as the apex body in the GoI, has
the responsibility of laying down policies, plans and
guidelines for DM and coordinating their
enforcement and implementation for ensuring timely
and effective response to disasters. The guidelines
will assist the central ministries, departments and
states to formulate their respective plans. It will
approve the national DM plan prepared by the
National Executive Committee (NEC) and plans of
the central ministries and departments. It will take
such other measures as it may consider necessary,
for the prevention of disasters, or mitigation, or
preparedness and capacity building, for dealing
with a threatening disaster situation or disaster. To
this end, it will be the responsibility of every central
ministry or department to provide assistance to
NDMA, and the state governments will also extend
necessary cooperation and assistance. It will
oversee the provision and application of funds for
mitigation and preparedness measures. It has the
power to authorise the departments or authorities
concerned, to make emergency procurement of
provisions or materials for rescue and relief in a
threatening disaster situation or disaster. It will also
provide such support to other countries in times of
disasters as may be determined by the central
government. The general superintendence, direction
and control of the National Disaster Response Force
(NDRF) are vested in and will be exercised by the
Authority. The National Institute of Disaster
Management (NIDM) will work within the framework
of the broad policies and guidelines of NDMA.
In essence, NDMA will concentrate on prevention,
preparedness, mitigation, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and recovery and also formulate
appropriate policies and guidelines for effective and
synergised national disaster response and relief. It
will also coordinate the enforcement and
implementation of policies and plans.
1.12.2 The National Executive Committee
1.12.2.1 The National Executive Committee (NEC)
comprises the secretary to the GoI in the ministry
or department having administrative control of the
subject of DM, as the chairperson, and the
secretaries to the GoI in the ministries/departments
of Agriculture, Atomic Energy, Defence, Drinking
Water Supply, Environment and Forests, Finance
(Expenditure), Health, Power, Rural Development,
Science and Technology, Space,
Telecommunications, Urban Development, Water
Resources and the Chief of the Integrated Defence
Staff of the Chiefs of Staff Committee as members.
Secretary, NDMA will be a special invitee to the
1.12.2.2 NEC is the executive committee of NDMA,
and is mandated to assist NDMA in the discharge
of its functions and also ensure compliance of the
directions issued by the central government for the
purposes of DM. One of the important functions
assigned to NEC is to coordinate the immediate
response in the event of any threatening disaster
situation or disaster on behalf of NDMA. Based on
the policy and guidelines, NEC will be responsible
for preparing the national plan, getting it approved
by NDMA and then operationalising it. NEC will also
require any department or agency of the
government to make available to NDMA or state
authorities, such men or material resources as are
available with it, for the purposes of handling
threatening disasters, emergency response, rescue
and relief. It will also perform such other functions
as NDMA may require it to perform.
1.12.2.3 The functions presently being discharged
by the Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) in appraising
the assessments made by the Inter-Ministerial
Central Teams of the damage, the requirement of
funds from the National Calamity Contingency Fund
(NCCF) and recommending the quantum of
assistance to be provided to the states will now be
1.12.3 National Disaster Response Force
1.12.3.1 The DM Act 2005 has mandated the
constitution of the National Disaster Response Force
(NDRF) for the purpose of specialised response to
a threatening disaster situation or disaster. The
general superintendence, direction and control of
the force is vested in, and exercised by, NDMA
and the command and supervision of this force is
vested in the Director General of NDRF . Presently,
NDRF comprises eight battalions with further
expansion to be considered in due course. Seven
of these battalions have been positioned at nine
different locations in the country based on the
vulnerability profile. This force is being trained and
equipped as a multi-disciplinary, multi-skilled, high-
tech force with state-of-the-art equipment. To ensure
prompt response during any disaster, each of the
eight NDRF battalions will have three to four states/
UTs as their areas of responsibility. Each battalion
will have three to four Regional Response Centres
(RRCs) at high vulnerability locations where trained
personnel with equipment will be pre-positioned.
NDRF units will maintain close liaison with the state
administration and be available to them pro-actively,
thus avoiding long procedural delays in deployment
in the event of any serious threatening disaster
situation. Besides, NDRF will also have a pivotal
role in Community Capacity Building and Public
Awareness. NDRF is also enjoined with the
responsibility of basic training of personnel of the
State Disaster Response Force (SDRF), Police, Civil
Defence, Home Guards and other stakeholders in
1.12.4.1 The experience of major disasters in the
last decade has clearly established the need for a
national initiative for pre-positioning of some
essential reserves at crucial locations, including
some for high altitude areas. These reserves are
intended to augment the resources of the states.
These will be co-located with NDRF battalions at
nine different locations in the country and released
to the states on the recommendation of the NDMA.
1.12.5 National Institute of Disaster
1.12.5.1 The National Institute of Disaster
Management (NIDM) has institutional capacity
development as one of its major responsibilities
along with training, documentation of research,
networking and development of a national level
information base. NIDM will function closely within
the broad policies and guidelines laid down by
NDMA and assist in developing training modules,
impart training to trainers and DM officials and
strengthening of Administrative Training Institutes
(ATIs) in the state. It will also be responsible for
synthesising research activities. NIDM will be geared
towards emerging as a ‘Centre of Excellence’ at
the national and international levels.
1.12.6 State Disaster Management Authority
1.12.6.1 At the state level, the State Disaster
Management Authority (SDMA) headed by the Chief
Minister, will lay down policies and plans for DM in
the state. It will, inter alia, approve the state plan in
accordance with the guidelines laid down by NDMA,
coordinate the implementation of the state plan,
recommend provision of funds for mitigation and
preparedness measures and review the
developmental plans of the different departments
of the state to ensure integration of prevention,
preparedness and mitigation measures.
1.12.6.2 The state government will constitute a
State Executive Committee (SEC) to assist the
SDMA in the performance of its functions. The SEC
will be headed by the Chief Secretary to the state
government and coordinate and monitor the
implementation of the national policy, the national
plan and the state plan. It will also provide information
to NDMA relating to different aspects of DM.
1.12.7 District Disaster Management Authority
1.12.7.1 At the cutting edge level, the District
Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) headed
by the District Magistrate, with the elected
representative of the local authority as the co-
chairperson, will act as the planning, coordinating
and implementing body for DM and take all
necessary measures for the purposes of DM in the
district in accordance with the guidelines laid down
by NDMA and SDMA. It will, inter alia, prepare the
district DM plan including the response plan for
the district, coordinate and monitor the
implementation of the national and state policies,
the national, state and district plans and ensure
that the guidelines for prevention, mitigation,
preparedness and response measures laid down
by NDMA and SDMA are followed by all
departments of the government at the district level
and the local authorities in the district.
1.12.8.1 This includes Urban Local Bodies (ULBs),
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), district and
Cantonment Boards and Town Planning Authorities
for control and management of civic services. These
bodies will ensure capacity building of their officers
and employees in DM, carry out relief, rehabilitation
and reconstruction activities in the affected areas
and will prepare DM plans in consonance with
guidelines of NDMA, SDMAs and DDMAs.
1.12.9.1 In any disaster, it is the community that is
always the first responder. Outside help comes in
only later. Training the community and making such
response organised is therefore of utmost
1.12.9.2 A revamping of the Civil Defence under
this scheme has been proposed in which the Civil
Defence will be made district-centric to cover all
the districts of the country in two phases. In the
first phase, 241 multi hazard districts will be
covered. Of these, 37 districts which are cyclone
prone, already have a Civil Defence set-up in its
1.12.9.3 In the meanwhile, the Civil Defence set-up
already existing in the country will be immediately
utilised to train the community for disaster response
in the concerned districts of the already activated
towns. The DG, Civil Defence, in their respective
states will work out training modules for disaster
management covering awareness generation, first
aid and rescue drills. Selected Civil Defence
personnel will be trained for Chemical, Biological,
Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) emergencies and
will be closely involved in assisting all response
agencies. Other Civil Defence personnel will support
the response agencies for management of CBRN.
NIDM will prepare a comprehensive training module
simultaneously and circulate it, which will be
incorporated in the already ongoing training.
1.13 Existing Institutional Arrangements
1.13.1.1 The Cabinet Committee on Management
of Natural Calamities (CCMNC) and the Cabinet
1.13.1.2 CCMNC has been constituted to oversee
all aspects relating to the management of natural
calamities, including assessment of the situation
and identification of measures and programmes
considered necessary to reduce its impact, monitor
and suggest long-term measures for the prevention
of such calamities formulate and recommend
programmes for public awareness for building up
society’s resilience to them. In specific cases, CCS
will also be kept informed of the manner in which
these disasters are being managed. NDMA’s linkages
with these committees will be institutionalised.
1.13.2 Role of Central Ministries and
1.13.2.1 As DM is a multi-disciplinary process, all
central ministries and departments will have a key
role in assisting NDMA in the discharge of its
functions. The nodal ministries and departments
of the GoI, i.e., the Ministries of Home Affairs,
Agriculture, Civil Aviation, Environment and Forests,
Health, Atomic Energy, Space, Earth Sciences,
Water Resources, Mines, Railways. etc., will
continue to address specific disasters as assigned
to them. Further, MHA will act as the administrative
ministry on the subject of DM.
1.13.3 National Crisis Management
1.13.3.1 The National Crisis Management
Committee (NCMC), comprising high-level officials
of the GoI headed by the Cabinet Secretary, will
also deal with specified major crises. It will be
supported by the Crisis Management Groups (CMG)
of the central nodal ministries. The Secretary,
NDMA, will be a member of this Committee.
1.13.4.1 The primary responsibility for DM rests
with the states. The arrangements put in place will
be such as to enable, empower and strengthen
the DM apparatus at the state level. Appropriate
policy, financial and administrative systems will be
established by the state governments. The central
government will provide all cooperation and
assistance to the state governments in consonance
with the gravity of the disaster situation.
1.13.4.2 State governments will take all measures
specified in the guidelines laid down by NDMA and
extend cooperation and assistance in DM to NDMA
1.13.5 District Administration
1.13.5.1 At the district level, the District Disaster
Management Authorities (DDMAs), which
constitute the very bedrock of the entire DM
apparatus, will be in charge of DM and will control
and coordinate all line departments, i.e., police,
fire services and any other form of support system
as part of their response. In the planning stage, the
Collector/District Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner
will head all planning and preparedness exercises
1.13.6 Management of Disasters Impacting
1.13.6.1 At times, the impact of disasters occurring
in one state may spread over to areas in other states.
Similarly, preventive measures in respect of certain
disasters, such as floods, etc. may be required to
be taken in one state, while the impact of their
occurrence may affect another. The administrative
hierarchy of the country is organised into the
national, state and district level administrations. This
presents some difficulties in respect of disasters
impacting more than one state. The management
of such situations calls for a coordinated approach
which can respond to a range of issues quite
different from those that normally present
themselves before, during and after the event.
1.14 N ational Cyclone Risk Mitigation
1.14.1 The Government of India has drawn up the
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP)
to be implemented with World Bank assistance.
Initially, the MHA formulated the project that was
transferred to NDMA in September 2006. The main
aim and objective of the project is to strengthen
the structural and non-structural cyclone mitigation
efforts and reduce the risk and vulnerability of the
coastal districts which are prone to cyclones.
NCRMP will assist states/UTs which are prone to
cyclones and will go a long way in building
capacities for cyclone risk mitigation. This is the
first such effort at the national level with World Bank
assistance of about US $300 million, covering 13
coastal states and UTs. NCRMP consists of the
i) Component A: Improvement of early
strengthening Last Mile Connectivity (LMC)
of cyclone warnings and advisories from
source/district/sub-district levels to
ii) Component B: Cyclone risk mitigation
investment which has identified nine sub-
components like construction of cyclone
shelters, construction of saline
embankments, mangrove plantations,
iii) Com ponent C: Technical assistance for
iv) Component D: Project management and
1.15 National Guidelines: Genesis,
1.15.1 The paradigm shift in the Government of
India’s focus from the earlier rescue and relief-
centric approach to a holistic approach covering all
aspects of DM has been the thrust of this effort to
evolve national guidelines for the management of
1.15.2 A nine-st ep process has been followed that
includes review of the present status and
assessment of critical gaps. This has been done
by taking on board the nodal agencies, ministries/
departments of GoI and state governments/UTs,
academic, scientific and technical institutions and
NGOs, and obtaining exhaustive feedback from
district and sub-district levels through interaction
with elected representatives, including those from
ULBs and PRIs. Mitigation and preparedness
aspects of the management of cyclones have been
dealt with in other chapters. Other non-structural
measures like micro-finance, insurance and re-
insurance, etc., have been covered separately.
1.15.3 There are several structural and non-
structural measures for effective cyclone DM. The
structural measures include construction of cyclone
resistant buildings, road links, culverts, bridges,
canals, drains, saline embankments, surface water
tanks, communication and power transmission
networks, etc. Non-structural measures like early
warning systems, communication and
dissemination, management of coastal zones,
awareness generation and disaster risk
management and capacity development, have also
2.1.1 Natural hazards like hydro-meteorological
events occur in all parts of the world, although some
regions are more vulnerable than others. Hazards
become disasters when people’s lives and
livelihoods are destroyed. Further, human and
material losses caused by disasters are a major
obstacle to sustainable development. By
developing a system of issuing accurate forecasts
and warnings in a form that is readily understood,
lives and property can be protected. The WMO
coordinates the efforts of national meteorological
services to mitigate human and property losses
through improved early warning services, risk
assessments and to raise public awareness on the
risk and vulnerability for TCs.
2.1.2 By 2019, WMO aims at reducing by 50%
the 10 year average fatality (observed during the
period 1994–2003) for hydro-meteorological
disasters. Early warning in the context of cyclones
is a short-term mitigation measure. It employs
detection of the system, its continuous monitoring,
prediction, formulation of warnings, identification
of threat areas and population and communication
of warning with lead time and clarity so that action
is taken by the concerned people to avoid negative
consequences. The emphasis is on disaster risk
reduction. It is said that one dollar invested in
disaster preparedness can prevent seven dollars’
worth of disaster-related economic losses which
is a considerable return on investment.
2.1.3 Due to the very destructive nature of TCs
and their adverse impact on human activities the
world over, considerable attention of scientists and
engineers has been drawn towards this subject
from early days. As a result, early warning systems
for TCs have been developed. In fact, most of the
meteorological services, including IMD, had been
established towards the middle or later part of the
nineteenth century to provide cyclone warnings to
sea-faring communities. With advanced science
and technology and global efforts, today it is
possible to organise dependable cyclone early
warning services and minimise the loss of life and
property by taking appropriate action on advance
warnings resulting in better and improved response.
2.1.4 In order to monitor and forecast cyclones,
data is required not only from the ocean where it
forms, but also from the entire globe if warnings
are to be provided with sufficient lead time. Data is
required from the oceans and atmosphere, from
accessible and inaccessible places during the day
and night at regular intervals.
2.1.5 Climatological data on the frequency and
intensity of TCs in the Indian seas that affected India
are available for a period of more than 110 years.
Frequency analyses have also been carried out to
determine the risk on a macro scale (up to the district
level). With the available data, hazard parameters
have also been analysed by some researchers on a
macro scale. But such data is not sufficient for
micro-scale (taluka/block/mandal level) analysis.
Hence, necessary data needs to be generated for
micro-scale analysis by strengthening observation
networks based on long-term planning. In the mean
time, cyclone risk assessment on a micro scale
will be attempted for all the cyclone-affected states
and Union Territories (UTs) of India by considering
2.1.6 The most important requirement is the
development of robust and reliable operational
techniques for forecasting the track, intensity and
hazards associated with TCs such as storm surge,
strong winds and heavy rainfall based on sound
hydrodynamics through numerical models and
storm surge modelling. Particular attention needs
be given to the coastal regions taking into account
the complex coastal orientation, estuaries—
including the massive freshwater discharges from
various river systems of the Arabian Sea and the
Bay of Bengal in the NIO Basin.
2.1.7 Surge prediction demands accurate surface
wind forecasts for several hours before the cyclone
landfall. Hence, further development of a suitable
meso-scale cyclone model along with generating
most representative high resolution (1 km grid scale)
surface wind vector field surrounding the cyclone
combining meso-scale model fields and all
available surface observations from land, ocean and
space based platforms is equally important. The
total water level is the combined effect of storm
surge and astronomical tide. Therefore, accurate
prediction of the tidal height in the model is
essential. For driving models, reliable real time data
of meteorological, hydrological and oceanographic
variables are fundamental. The data will be freely
available to participating agencies through fail-safe
networks, including meteorological satellite data
reception facilities and associated
telecommunication support infrastructure.
2.2.1.1 Cyclones in the NIO Basin are monitored
with the help of land-based, ocean-based and
space-based observational systems which include
conventional meteorological observations, reports
from ships, observations from ocean data buoys,
coastal radars (conventional and Doppler) and
national and international satellites (geo-stationary
2.2.1.2 To facilitate quantification of the likely
impact associated with cyclone landfall, land-
based observational density will be enhanced
beyond IMD’s modernisation plan. Table 2.1
overleaf provides the present level of the land-based
observational set-up of IMD’s enhancements
proposed under its modernisation plan and
additional augmentation required to be established
beyond its modernisation plan.
2.2.1.3 Observations by automatic instruments
and quick fail-proof communication of observations
to forecasting centres are modern concepts.
Doppler Radars are used the world over to detect
and monitor localised severe weather systems.
Sustainability of the instruments against adverse
weather conditions is essential. Adequate density
of network is another factor which needs to be looked
into during the process of modernisation.
Modernisation, augmentation and standardisation
of the meteorological observation network
maintained by other agencies at the centre and
states will assign priority in the modernisation of
their network, so that observations are useful and
IMD will carry out modernisation of its observation
network with density augmentation, wherever
needed, on a priority basis, covering the 84 cyclone-
prone districts in all coastal states and UTs. Central
and state government agencies, other than IMD,
dealing with meteorological observations will
assign priority to the modernisation of the
meteorological and hydrological observation network
in their domain in these 84 districts.
2.2.1.4 Efforts are to be made for the reception of
all available data at the earliest, directly from the
original data generating agencies for their effective
utilisation in cyclone warning systems in India.
2.2.1.5 All necessary data reception facilities from
the forthcoming satellite payloads such as METSAT,
INSAT , OCEANSAT and MEGHATROPIQUES,
algorithm development, timely product generation,
updated terrain/land use mapping, etc., in respect
of each of the future satellites will be put in place
by the Department of Space/ IMD in time with the
satellite launch so that the respective products can
become available for cyclone early warning
2.2.1.6 Enhancement of Observational Network
The following enhancements will be carried out in
respect of different types of observational network:
• Early establishment of planned Automatic
Weather Stations (AWS) and Rain-gauge
• Establishment of at least one High Wind
Speed Recorder and one surge recorder for
each coastal district, vulnerable to cyclones
* Covering the entire country, including coastal districts.
** To be activated during the High Impact Weather Period
*** Likely to be provided in airports. Augmentation to cover all coastal districts.
Table 2.1 Additional Augmentation of Land Based Observational Networks of IMD
• Enhancement of a Doppler Weather Radar
Network over coastal regions at an interval
• Augmentation of high resolution vertical
soundings with the enhancement of Radio
Sonde (RS)/Radio Wind (RW) Network and
introduction of Wind Profilers
• Enhancement of shallow water and deep
water buoy network over Indian seas.
• Enhancement of ocean observations
involving ships of opportunity, Coast Guard
vessels and Indian Naval Ships; off-shore
• Inclusion of subsurface ocean parameters
from space and in situ observations,
especially in the mixed layer.
• Ensure the operational service of at least two
geostationary satellites over Indian seas at any
given point of time (with water vapour channel
and vertical sounder capability as planned
in INSAT 3D), especially during cyclone months.
• Generation of high spatial resolution data
sets of land-surface parameters on weekly/
bi-weekly basis utilising IRS and other global
• Real time reception of global satellite
products, especially from microwave
sensors, over Indian seas for operational use
through bilateral and multi-lateral
2.2.2 Further Issues to be Addressed
2.2.2.1 The NDMA Sub-Group on Early Warning
Systems (EWS) for cyclone guidelines has identified
some more issues to be addressed beyond the
IMD’s modernisation plans which are essential to
raise our cyclone DM capabilities to international
standards. The table below provides the major
issues that have been identified, and the efforts to
2.2.3 Aircraft Probing of Cyclone (APC)
2.2.3.1 In the absence of aircraft probing facilities,
it has not been possible to obtain realistic initial
state three-dimensional description of cyclones in
the NIO region. Lack of such critical observations
from the cyclone core environment is resulting in
large track and intensity forecast errors. The
establishment of APC facilities of the cyclone core
environment can significantly address this critical
data gap in cyclone intensity and track forecasting.
2.2.3.2 Other applications of APC Facility for multi-
i) Airborne Doppler Weather Radar for
identification of heavy rainfall and strong
wind zones (cyclone impact assessment).
ii) Airborne Laser Terrain Mapping (ALTM) of
coastal zones and islands (delineating depth
and extent of coastal inundation, hazard
mapping and vulnerability assessment).
iii) Post-cycl one damage assessment and
aerial survey (for impact assessment and
planning post-disaster relief operations).
iv) Planning observational campaign for the
advancement of R&D efforts in cyclone
forewarning (up to 150 days per year,
including such cyclonic disturbances formed
during the monsoon season, pre-monsoon
thunderstorm events in eastern India –
kalbaisakhi – and the study of other high
impact weather phenomena over land).
v) Aerial mapping/observational facility for
multi-hazard impact assessment (floods,
earthquakes, landslides, forest fires,
vi) APC facility can also be used for the study
of monsoon systems in South Asian
countries, research on the effects of climate
change and for defence applications as well.
2.2.3.3 The recommendations of the Cyclone
Review Committee (CRC), 1984 were revisited. The
CRC had fully endorsed the need for establishing
APC facilities for observations from the inner core
of cyclones. Similar recommendations were made
at different workshops organised by NDMA at
Hyderabad, Ahmedabad and Delhi, and at the First
India Disaster Management Congress held in
2.2.3.4 The need for establishing APC facilities was
also endorsed by top-ranking officials of NTRO, MoD
and DoS at a meeting specially convened by NDMA
in December 2006 (see page 154).
APC facility will be set up on high priority. IMD/
NRSA will provide the technical control and
operational control will be provided by the Indian
Air Force (IAF). Day-to-day operational schedules
and flight paths will be decided in consultation with
user departments such as IMD, Central Water
Commission (CWC), etc. Ministry of Earth Sciences
(MoES) will initiate all necessary actions for
2.2.4.1 A high altitude Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV) can provide detailed observations of the near
surface, high wind environment; an area often
too dangerous for manned aircraft for taking
observations. The first UAV touched down after a
10-hour mission into the tropical storm “Ophelia”
on 16 September 2005. This aircraft, known as an
Aerosonde, has the potential to emerge as a cost-
effective observational platform for the
reconnaissance and surveillance of tropical
Considering its vast coastline, India will develop
and utilize UAV capabilities for surveillance and
prediction of TCs. This effort can be coordinated
2.2.5 Implementation Strategy of
2.2.5.1 It is necessary to organise the efforts
required for generating real time observational data
for cyclone Early Warning (EW) from various
government departments and agencies at the
national and state levels. In order to ensure timely
collection and accessibility of data for its utilisation
with regard to cyclone EW, specific tasks are to be
carried out by various nodal agencies assigned with
specific responsibilities as per the existing arrange-
ments and further augmentation of responsibilities.
These are are shown in Table 2.2 below.
Table 2.2 Real time Observational Data for Cyclone EW
2.2.5.2 The designated agencies shown in Table 2.2 will be responsible for coordinating efforts to
collect the required data in collaboration with other agencies. Comprehensive quality control and data
assimilation of the combined data set will be carried out by the respective agencies for generating most
representative cyclone specific, high resolution data sets for numerical weather prediction models. These
analysed cyclone data sets, along with observational data, will be made available to the various agencies
involved in operational/R&D efforts in cyclone EW, mitigation and risk management activities.
2.2.6 Forecasting of Tropical Cyclones
2.2.6.1 The track forecast of TCs is prepared with the help of track forecast models of different types,
including numerical techniques. Currently, IMD uses a limited run of the quasi-lagrangian dynamic model
for track prediction along with other synoptic, climatological and empirical techniques. Intensity forecasts
are made by using satellite techniques. For prediction of storm surge, different dynamical techniques are
used. The forecast advisories received from different international agencies such as the Joint Typhoon
Warning Centre (JTWC), Pearl Harbour, USA; United Kingdom Meteorological Office (UKMO); European
Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
(ECMWF); and National Centre for Medium-Range
Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) are also
considered while finalising the forecast. The current
accuracy of track forecast is about ±140 km for a
24 hour forecast and ±250 km for a 48-hour
forecast. The error increases with increase in the
duration of the forecast projection. This translates
into warnings covering very large areas if issued
more than 24 hours ahead. This limits the lead time
of the warning to 24 hours. The accuracy of these
forecasts need to be improved significantly.
Globally, with the use of multi-ensemble and meso-
scale models, accuracy in the range of ± 60–80
km for a 24-hour forecast has been achieved.
Track and intensity forecasts will be improved by
using state-of-the-art, multi-layer meso-scale
models with real time inputs of data from satellites
and ground-based radar systems.
2.2.6.2 IMD will lead the concentrated national
effort to achieve improvements involving:
i) Selection of a suitable model and
establishing a system of generating the
most representative initial state 3-D
atmospheric fields with the implementation
of an appropriate data assimilation system
for satellite data inputs (scatterometer
winds, high resolution satellite derived
winds, satellite derived temperature and
ii) Track prediction using several advanced
techniques, including the super ensemble
iii) Extensive validation using data of several
iv) Developing institutional interfaces with IMD,
2.2.7 Real time Data Reception, Processing
2.2.7.1 To generate a most representative 3-D
structure of the atmosphere for forcing cyclone
forecast models, the following are to be carried
i) All the observational data from various
heterogeneous platforms will be collected
and transmitted to operational forecast
centres for their utilisation in improving
ii) Appropriate automated data processing and
quality control algorithms will be developed
by agencies like IMD, NCMRWF and
research institutes connected with
meteorological data processing and
iii) Im proved high resolution meso-scale data
assimilation systems involving 3-D and 4-D
variational assimilation techniques will be
iv) Cyclone specific, most representative, initial
state and boundary fields will be generated.
2.2.8 Multi-Model Track, Intensity Hazards
2.2.8.1 Following are some of the important
recommendations for the improvement of track,
intensity hazard and landfall forecast:
i) Improvement of global, regional and meso-
scale modelling systems for prediction of
the track, intensity and landfall of cyclones,
ii) Development of a coupled ocean-
atmospheric meso-scale model for the
prediction of genesis, intensification of TCs
over seas and prediction of storm surges,
inland inundation and ocean waves,
iii) Real time reception of cyclone forecast fields
from other leading global centres (US
Weather Service, UKMO, ECMWF , Japan
Meteorological Agency (JMA), etc.) to use
in the objective assessment of striking
potential and heavy rainfall forecasts.
2.2.9 Historical Digital Cyclone Track
2.2.9.1 Accurate determination of TC landfall,
location and timing is the key to the effectiveness
of TC warnings/forecasts for a specific region. The
relevance and availability of best cyclone track data
for economic analysis is of particular importance to
risk models that estimate the probability of future
losses from TCs. Based on this basic information,
it is possible to produce normalised databases for
losses and damage estimates from natural
disasters and for predicting the probabilities and
costs of future events based on changes of the
Historical track data with details like position,
intensity (wind and sea level pressure), size, radius
of maximum wind and landfall parameters will be
archived in digital form and this data will be made
available to users/institutions.
2.2.10 Appropriate Modelling Framework
2.2.10.1 Forecasting of land-falling TCs with a lead-
time of 48–72 hours is important. Some coastal
areas have developed to such an extent that more
than 12 hours are needed for organizing emergency
response preparations. Although track forecasting
has improved dramatically for longer time periods,
further improvements are required. This becomes
imperative as population increases rapidly in many
2.2.10.2 Advancement in operational TC intensity
prediction is lagging behind improvement in TC track
forecasting. In this regard, the use of the satellite
scatterometer data (e.g. QuickSCAT , SSM/I, TMI)
has the potential for providing a Dvorak-like intensity
estimation technique. Forecasters will benefit from
these latest developments by cross-checking
available wind distributions with the synoptic
observations and satellite/radar images while
estimating the TC intensity. Effective assimilation
of the QuickSCAT and SSM/I wind data as well as
other remotely sensed data into Numerical Weather
Prediction (NWP) will help to improve the TC track
and intensity forecast by with the use of numerical
IMD will ensure real time reception of the satellite
scatterometer data, wind fields from TMI and SSM/
I sources as their assimilation into the NWP model
is essential for improving forecast accuracy.
2.2.10.3 Ensemble forecasting techniques are
being increasingly used in TC track prediction in
recent years. The single model ensemble approach
defines perturbed initial conditions that represent
the uncertainty in the analysis and then integrates
the ensemble members with a single model, and
verifications show that the multiple model ensemble
approach results in noticeable improvement in TC
track forecast errors. Recent research suggests that
a TC track forecasting system can be developed to
assist forecasters in selecting the best performing
NWP models to construct the ensemble forecast
IMD will introduce multi-model ensemble forecast
techniques for operational cyclone warnings.
2.3 Prediction of Severe Weather and
2.3.1 To predict the time of onset of severe
weather and storm surges at specific locations,
detailed knowledge of the wind and precipitation
structure of the TC (e.g., TC size, gale wind radius)
have to be known besides the forecast track.
Observations in recent years from advanced
sensors (e.g., Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission
(TRMM), Special Sensor Microwave/Imager (SSM/
I), Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit (AMSU),
and (QuickSCAT) on the new generation of
meteorological satellites have greatly enhanced our
knowledge on the structural characteristics of wind
and precipitation fields associated with cyclones.
2.3.2 Valuable and critical information on wind
fields can only be obtained from GPS dropsondes
and Stepped Frequency Microwave Radiometers
from aircraft reconnaissance. The Doppler Weather
Radar is an important equipment in terms of
obtaining very high resolution wind and rainfall
distribution of land-falling TCs. Correlation and
extrapolation techniques have been usefully
employed to depict the wind structure of TCs and
to make very short-range rainfall forecasts.
2.3.3 IMD has been using locally developed
nomograms and a PC-based storm surge model
developed by the Indian Institute of Technology,
Delhi, for storm surge prediction at the time of TC
landfall without having any means of generating
spatial inundation of surge waters. Recently, under
the World Bank funded Andhra Pradesh Hazard
Mitigation and Emergency Cyclone Recovery Project
(APHM and ECRP), a tailor-made framework model
of storm surge and wind damage, along with GIS
based Decision Support Systems (DSS) has been
developed to demarcate the extent, duration and
depth of inundation scenarios and quantifiable
damages to houses, crops, power/communication
Storm surge modelling efforts for generating spatial
inundation and wind damage over the land will be
developed and incorporated in the operational
2.4.1 Some countries have set up dedicated
video/audio facilities and websites to communicate
with other emergency organisations and technical
groups. A consensus assessment of the cyclone
forecast is arrived at through broad based
consultation and coordination.
2.4.2 Weather information is being accessed by
general public—ranging from highly intelligent and
knowledgeable people to weather illiterate
individuals. At the intelligent and highly weather-
literate end of the spectrum, there is greater demand
for real time meteorological data relevant to current
weather conditions (e.g., winds, rain and
temperatures). Many weather services now make
available information from automatic weather
stations (AWS) on their websites. Some put radar
images on their websites as well, which has been
found to strengthen the credibility of the services.
This is being done in India as well by IMD. Some
emergency services as well as operators of public
utilities such as airports, ferries, buses and trains
would like to be given advance alert prior to
community-wide dissemination of TC warnings,
even if it is as short as a few minutes. This allows
them to organise and/or mobilize necessary
response resources before the public actually reacts
to the warnings. This is particularly useful when
the public’s reaction to a warning translates
immediately into increased demand on public
2.4.3 Besides, traditional synoptic observations
and TC warning advisories, global operational
agencies [National Centre for Environmental
Prediction (NCEP), UKMO, ECMWF , JMA, etc.] and
major global research institutes have put much
effort in sharing Numerical Weather Prediction
products ‘best track’ databases, radar images and
satellite images as well as scatterometer data over
2.5.1 Parametric wind models form the basis of
the TC hazard component of many risk models.
The next-generation parametric wind model would
provide a more realistic wind field and improve the
TC hazard component of a risk model, which can
lead to and thereby improve loss and cost
estimates associated with TC landfall. Recent wind
field observations collected with Global Positioning
System (GPS) dropsondes have many
characteristics that are not represented by standard
2.5.2 Risk models are made of four basic
components: a hazard component, vulnerability
component, a damage component, and a loss
component. The hazard component provides the
probabilities and characteristics of a specific hazard.
For a TC, it would provide information such as nature
of storm track at landfall, forward motion, wind field
and decay over land. The vulnerability component
provides information about the impact on structures
and human population considering several factors.
The damage component of the risk model uses
this information to calculate the expected damage
and the loss component estimates the costs
associated with rebuilding, loss of business and
liabilities. Best-track data are also used to define
probability distributions for characteristics of TCs
(e.g., forward motion and intensity) in a risk model.
Additional storm characteristics such as the radius
of maximum winds, maximum gusts and rainfall
would improve the depiction of TCs by the hazard
component of a risk model and lead to a more
realistic estimate of future losses and costs and
improve estimates of the benefits of mitigation
2.6.1 Based on the analysis carried out above, it
will be appropriate to consider establishing a
suitable institutional framework in the form of a
institute at national level (discussed in detail in
section 7.14) so that all the developmental objectives
required for total cyclone risk management at the
local level can be achieved. Further, to supplement
this endeavour, efforts discussed earlier to procure
a specially instrumented Reconnaissance Aircraft
and UAVs for collecting spatial observations from
the core cyclone environment are to be organised
for facilitating improved cyclone EW. Such a facility
has been the longstanding demand of the scientific
community in India. Such a direction figures in the
recommendations of the Scientific Advisory
Committee to the Cabinet (SACC) in December 1984
and the Reports of Recommendations of CRC
(Volumes I, II and, III) for implementation by various
central and state government agencies.
2.6.2 Multi-model cyclone forecast products from
various sources (national and international weather
centres) are to be considered for framing operational
cyclone warning and, accordingly, respective state/
UT authorities will take all necessary emergency
response and mitigation activities to deal with the
disaster effectively. Such a mechanism is working
very successfully in many advanced countries.
Similar capabilities in this country can also be
attained by the adoption of a suitable framework of
hazard mitigation modelling, GIS-based Spatial
Decision Support Systems (SDSS), well defined
communication protocols for various emergency
responder groups both at the government and
community levels, stating well defined
responsibilities of the participating agencies.
2.7.1 Very Short-range Forecasting
The critical period for some places is 6–12 hours
before TC landfall. In such a short time-frame, NWP
guidance cannot offer much assistance to
forecasters. Very often, forecasters have to
subjectively now-cast the TC movement in the next
6–12 hours based on radar images and limited
synoptic/AWS data. Any abrupt change in the
direction of movement and/or looping motion of
these TCs near the coast poses much difficulty in
forecasting the landfall location and timing.
Therefore, movement of the TC prior to landfall has
an important bearing on the formulation of an
effective warning and emergency response strategy.
Research initiatives to improve the capability of
forecasters in very short-range forecasting of land-
falling TCs are essential and will be carried out by
IMD and other institutions dealing with the subject.
2.7.2 Developments in data assimilation and
numerical models will continue independent of the
TC forecast problem. Ongoing improvements to 3D
and 4D variational assimilation methods with the
inclusion of new data sources and the use of
physical initialisation procedures will continue to
produce improvement in the definition of the large-
scale environment and outer structure of TCs (and
hence in track forecasts). For those basins (tropical
part of US Atlantic and Pacific) that are fortunate
enough to have aircraft reconnaissance, availability
of dropsonde data and eventually advanced NWP
targeting strategies will result in further significant
improvement in track forecasting. The question of
vortex specification synthetically remains open. Its
use is possibly dependent on the application. For
short-term track and intensity forecasts, it would
seem necessary in the near future. Careful
diagnosis of its impact on short- to medium-range
prediction will be undertaken. With increase in
resolution, the question also arises of how much
real TC structure can or needs to be represented in
The issue of vortex initialisation will be investigated,
2.7.3 With continuous improvement in numerical
guidance on track, there appears to have been a
slight reduction in basic research on TC motion.
The problem of these environmental interactions,
erratic tracks such as looping, stalling or rapidly
accelerating cyclones and recurving are generally
unpredictable and much research is needed to
tackle these issues. For short-term track forecasts,
it is possible to improve the details in forecasts via
improved meso-scale assimilation techniques (3D,
4D variational assimilation) that take advantage of
the latest observational data sets with high spatial
and temporal resolution, e.g., scatterometer, radar,
rain rate and remotely sensed data. At these high
resolutions, initialisation and performance of
physical parameterisations become significant
research issues in themselves . The effect of
surrounding meso-scale convective systems
(MCSs) and convective asymmetries on TC motion
is mostly unexplained. Now that models can
generally handle the ‘smooth’ motion of TCs, is it
possible to predict details in the tracks that might
be related to such meso-scale features in the
environment? For short-term, high-resolution
prediction, will attempts be made to simulate eye-
wall cycles and their potential effect on small-scale
track deviations? Questions relating to storm track,
structure, rainfall and landfall are yet to be answered
to the level of satisfaction. Further work is needed
to determine how to initialise circulation in such
circumstances and to understand the interaction
between the storm’s circulation and the underlying
ocean surface and feedback mechanism.
Advanced atmosphere-ocean-land assimilation-
prediction systems need to be employed.
2.7.4 For further improvements in short-term
forecast, a major issue will be meso-scale data
analysis and initialisation, eventually within a coupled
atmosphere-ocean-land system. Defining details in
storm structure and meso-scale aspects of the
storm’s environment is a challenging task. It will no
doubt require very high resolution, use of some of
the data sets previously mentioned, and in the short-
term, the use of a synthetic vortex. At high resolution
and for intense circulations, other significant issues
are initialisation and the performance of physical
2.7.5 Research support is required to be
improved dramatically in India with regard to the
skill of both track and intensity forecasting of TCs.
Satellite radiometry and scatterometry data have
the potential to improve TC track and intensity
forecasting, provided they are suitably employed
in hazard modelling and now-casting systems that
IMD will address these aspects in its modernisation
2.7.6 Developing Centralised Lead-Time
2.7.6.1 It is established world over that science
and technology options offer examples of good
practices in terms of demonstrable disaster risk
reduction that can be built into ongoing
development planning policies both in terms of long-
term mitigation/risk reduction and short-term
mitigation measures (monitoring, EW, impact
assessment and customised warning
dissemination protocol). Further, the necessary
steps needed for early implementation are to be
organised by establishing necessary institutional
support for holistic cyclone risk management
beyond the early warning. These include damage
assessment spatial scenarios of local-scale storm
surge inundation, wind damage to lifeline
infrastructure, crops, houses, appropriate mitigation
strategies, and the development of DSS with tailor-
made warning dissemination protocols to DM
2.8 Cyclone Warning Generation
2.8.1.1 IMD is the nodal agency in India for
providing cyclone warnings through its Area Cyclone
Warning Centres (ACWCs) at Kolkata, Chennai and
Mumbai and the Cyclone Warning Centres¹ (CWCs)
at Visakhapatnam, Bhubaneshwar and
Ahmedabad. The cyclone warning process is
coordinated by the office of the Deputy Director
General of Meteorology (Weather Forecasting) at
Pune and office of Deputy Director General (Cyclone
Warning) in the cyclone warning division of the
Northern Hemispheric Analysis Centre (NHAC) at
New Delhi. Considering the capability of cyclone
warning and the facilities available there, NHAC at
New Delhi has been designated as a Regional
Specialised Meteorological Centre (RSMC) for TCs.
It is one of six such centres in the world; the others
being RSMC–Miami, RSMC–Honolulu (USA),
RSMC–Tokyo (Japan), RSMC–St. Denis (La-reunion),
and RSMC–Nadi (Fiji), recognised by WMO under
a global system of cyclone warnings. WMO
coordinates cyclone warning activities globally to
standardise the system and to bring about
improvements. As an international commitment
through the WMO/ESCAP (Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and Pacific) Panel on TCs, TC
advisories are issued by RSMC, New Delhi, to
ESCAP panel member countries during TCs in the
Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea. The three–
hourly advisory messages are issued eight times a
day. The ESCAP Panel countries are Bangladesh,
India, Maldives, Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Sri
2.8.1.2 Doordarshan and All India Radio (AIR)
stations at New Delhi are provided cyclone warning
information by RSMC–New Delhi for inclusion in
the national broadcast/telecast. Information on
cyclone warnings is furnished on a real time basis
to the Control Room in the MHA, Government of
India and NDMA, besides other ministries and
departments of the Government and to the cyclone-
2.8.1.3 User specific warnings are issued to
commercial shipping lines, the merchant navy,
ports, Fisheries Departments and fishermen,
government agencies, all transportation services
(land, ocean and air), farmers, others specially
registered with IMD, AIR, Doordharshan and other
TV channels, print media and the general public.
2.8.2 Existing Four-stage Warning System
2.8.2.1 A four-stage cyclone warning system was
introduced in IMD from the pre-monsoon season of
1999, replacing the previous two-stage warning
i) First, a special bulletin called Pre-Cyclone
Watch is issued containing early potential
indications about the development of a
cyclonic disturbance in the NIO region, its
possible development into a cyclone and
adverse weather that specific areas of the
coastal belt are likely to experience.
Additional warnings in respect of fisheries
and ports are issued to enable the respective
authorities to take necessary precautionary
ii) At the second stage, a Cyclone Alert
message is issued 48 hours prior to the
expected time of commencement of
adverse weather over the specific coastal
iii) A Cyclone Warning is issued 24 hours in
advance of the cyclone’s landfall in order to
cover the devastating impact of cyclones
iv) Finally, a Post Landfall Outlook is issued
12 hours before the landfall and continues
till such time as cyclone force gusty winds
are expected to prevail over the interior areas.
2.8.3 Increased stages and Frequency of
2.8.3.1 There is a need for increasing the frequency
and lead-time of warnings covering the pre- and
post-cyclone landfall phases. The targeted
requirements for improvement of the system are
Table 2.3 Targeted Requirements for Increasing Frequency of Warnings
2.8.4 Generation of Customised Cyclone
a) Participation of operational agencies
(IMD, NCMRWF , Indian Air Force, Indian
Coast Guard, Navy, CWC, Prasar
Bharati), research scientists, the Central
personnel in the preparation of sector-
specific multi-lingual cyclone warning.
a) Evolving appropriate institutional
arrangements involving offices of IMD
(State Meteorological Centres), SDMA,
DM Commissioner, CWC and other line
departments for sectoral customisation
of cyclone impact in respect of
protecting their infrastructure.
b) Preparation of user friendly warnings
in local language for facilitating
2.9 Requirement of Additional Support
2.9.1.1 The effort involves additional support
infrastructure to be commissioned for implementing
state-of-the-art cyclone EW and Lead Time Impact
Assessment Systems as following:
i) Adaptation of fail-proof data reception
ii) Adaptation of high-end computing,
visualisation and networking infrastructure
2.9.2 Fail-Proof Data Communication
Infrastructure for Exchange of Meteorological Data
and Warnings (within Metrological services—
2.9.2.1 The Global T elecommunication System
(GTS) for transmission and reception of weather
and climate data and forecast products between
meteorological offices nationally and internationally
consists of an integrated network of point-to-point
circuits and multi-point circuits which interconnect
meteorological telecommunication centres (MTCs).
The circuits of the GTS are composed of a
combination of terrestrial and satellite
telecommunication links. MTCs are responsible for
receiving data and relaying it selectively on GTS
circuits. GTS is organised on a three-level basis,
i) The Main Telecommunication Network (MTN).
ii) The Regional Meteorological
Telecommunication Networks (RMTNs).
iii) The National Meteorological
Telecommunication Networks (NMTNs).
DRF—Disaster Response Force; CDT—Civil Defence Teams
The regional telecommunication hubs (RTHs) on the
MTN perform an interface function between RMTNs
2.9.2.2 MTN is the core network of GTS. It links
together three world meteorological centres and
2.9.2.3 The first component of the Satellite
Communication System is the Area Forecast System
(AFS) which supports civil aviation and the second
component is the GTS satellite data exchange
system for the WMO Region II (Asia) data exchange.
They jointly comprise the first component of the
overall system. This component distributes grid
products and generates observational and worded
forecast messages. These products are received
from other communication centres or are built at
the gateway. They are distributed on multiple data
streams of the International Satellite Communication
System (ISCS). The data is transmitted using the
X.25 protocol from the RTH/AFC to the
communication service provider and up-linked via
IMD will establish Satellite Communication Systems
(SCS) on priority for meteorological data reception
and delivery with redundant bandwidth at par with
2.9.3 Adaptation of high-end Computing,
2.9.3.1 High-end computing research applications
harness the raw speed and data storage capacity
of advanced computing platforms to science’s most
data-intensive, complex, and challenging problems
like Earth and Space Science; cyclone track and
intensity prediction, and the impact of global
2.9.3.2 Advances in the fields of Internet and
mobile communication technology have proved to
have significant impact on warning dissemination
and information exchange in several countries. As
regards warning generation and external liaison,
India has to consciously shift from a predominantly
science-centred approach to a more user-oriented
and customised one to suit local needs of various
sectors (infrastructure, socio-economic, natural
2.9.3.3 Nurturing partnerships with the media and
local DM (SDMAs/DDMAs) will become an integral
part of this imminent change in our strategy and it
would require seamless interface with NDMA. The
planned high-end computing and networking
Infrastructure with nodes in various coastal states/
UTs will take care of this requirement.
2.9.3.4 The Virtual Reality (VR) infrastructure
generally consists of an extensive range of
computers, projection systems and interaction
devices. High-end VR systems can be set up by a
personal computer cluster driven by Linux and a
five-sided projection system. In the low-end
domain, PCs and smaller UNIX workstations from
several producers can be configured for use in
combination with projection tables or simple
monitors and stereo glasses. Special care is to be
taken to ensure the software infrastructure to be
platform independent, supporting all possible
heterogeneity in terms of operating systems like
IRIX, HP UX, Sun Solaris, Linux, Windows 2000/
XP/Vista. By this strategy, a high scalability to follow
the trend in the near future of even complex VR
applications will become feasible on low-cost
systems with standard PC components.
2.9.3.5 Computing environments and toolkits that
are critical for VR environment include architecture
adaptive computing environment (aCe), Kernel
lattice parallelism (KeLP), Parallel algorithms and
software for irregular scientific applications,
Advanced Computational Testing and Simulation
(ACTS) toolkit, scalable visualization toolkits and
tools to explore geometric complexity.
High-end Computing (scalable 30-50 Teraflops peak
performance), Storage (800 Terabytes) and
Communication Network (Gigabit Ethernet)
Infrastructure will be commissioned as a part of
the National Cyclone Disaster Management Institute
(NCDMI) with seamless connectivity with NDMA,
SDMAs of coastal states/UTs and DDMAs of 84
coastal districts vulnerable to cyclones. Such a
facility will also support additional capacity
enhancements (hazard, risk and vulnerability
studies) planned for holistic cyclone risk
management in states and districts.
2.9.3.6 The planned high-end computing and
networking infrastructure with nodes in various
coastal states/UTs would take care of the seamless
access of local scale spatial and non-spatial data
sets for customisation and dissemination of various
sector specific hazard maps over a fail safe
communication backbone between NDMA and
SDMAs/DDMAs. Establishment of the proposed
national-level institutional communication framework
under the National Disaster Communication
Infrastructure (NDCI) and cyclone risk management
capacities under NCDMI would enable addressing
all the state-level issues related with cyclone risk
mitigation in a holistic manner.
2.9.4 Economic Database for Cost-Benefit
2.9.4.1 The development of a database on the
economic losses and costs associated with TC
landfall would allow the losses and costs to be
normalised for changes in population, wealth and
inflation in the affected areas. To maximise the
usefulness of the data for cost-benefit analysis, the
data will include the expenses associated with TC
warning and information services and mitigation
An appropriate system will be established for
quantifying and evaluating the returns on investments
pertaining to mitigation projects on a regular basis
by the central and coastal state governments/UTs.
2.10.1 Role of Central Agencies
i) Enhancement of observational network.
ii) Real time data collection and transmission.
iii) C yclone specific data processing and
iv) Use of multiple models for track, intensity
v) Objective assessment of striking potential
based on decision support systems.
vi) Multi-sectoral/multi-lingual warning
customisation in a user-friendly mode for
2.10.2 Role of State-Level Agencies
i) Collection and archival of region specific
ii) Development of customised spatial and non-
spatial data sets at the smallest village and
taluka level (involving Survey of India and
iii) Devel opment of appropriate tools for local-
scale impact assessment based on landfall
and intensity forecasts obtained from central
iv) Development of fully customised hazard
maps in respect of various attributes (viz.
houses, infrastructure, crops, power
transmission/communication network,
roads and bridges, etc.) for planning
appropriate strategies by respective
v) Generation of multi-sectoral customised
warnings in the local languages for
vi) Disaggregated demographic data for
vulnerable sections (elderly, infants and
1. Improvement of the existing meteorological
observational and communication network
with additional augmentation will be carried
out on a priority basis. Augmentation and
modernisation of rain gauge network tide
gauges, etc. will also be carried out. State
governments as well as some central
government departments [Indian Air Force,
Indian Navy, DoS, CWC, Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR)] will give priority
to the modernisation of meteorological
networks in their domain. Historical cyclone
track data with details like position, intensity,
size, wind, pressure and temperature,
radius of maximum wind and landfall
parameters will be archived in digital form
and data needs will be made available to
users/institutions (refer sections 2.2.1, 2.2.9).
[Action: MoES, MoWR, DoS, IAF ,
Indian Navy, Coastal States/UTs]
2. Operational service of at least two
geostationary satellites over Indian seas at
any given point of time will be ensured (with
water vapour channel and vertical sounder
capability as planned in INSAT 3D). High
resolution spatial data sets of land-surface
parameters will be generated on a weekly/
satellites. Arrangements will be made for
cooperation. All observations from various
heterogeneous platforms (from land, ocean
and space) will be collected from the original
global data sources and transmitted to
operational agencies for improved cyclone
warning (refer sections 2.2.1.4 to 2.2.1.6).
3. Arrangements for Special Observations
from the Cyclone Core Environment
i) MoES is made responsible for
commissioning the APC facility for the
country with the support activities
ii) IAF to provide necessary command
control, operations and maintenance
support of APC facilities and IMD and
other user agencies to lead the
planning of flight schedules for probing
the cyclone environment (refer sections
4. Action will be taken by various nodal agencies
to ensure timely collection and accessibility
of data for its utilisation in cyclone early
warning as per Table 2.4 overleaf.
5. Comprehensive quality control and data
assimilation of the combined data set will
be carried out by identified agencies for
generating most representative cyclone
specific high resolution data sets for
numerical weather prediction models.
Research initiatives to improve the capability
of forecasters in very short-range forecasting
of land-falling TCs are very essential.
Analysed cyclone specific data sets along
with observational data will be made
available to various agencies involved in
operational/R&D efforts in cyclone EW,
mitigation and risk management activities
(refer sections 2.2.5.2, 2.2.7, 2.7.1).
[Action: MoES/IMD with Academic
6. Cyclone specific most representative initial
through appropriate automated data
processing and quality control algorithms
and by development of improved high
resolution meso-scale data assimilation
systems involving 3D and 4D Variational
Assimilation Techniques (refer sections
[Action: MoES with research and
7. Multi-model cyclone track, intensity and
landfall prediction models (global, regional,
atmospheric models) will be developed
(refer sections 2.2.8, 2.2.10.3).
8. Facility for building centralised cyclone
impact assessment for quantification of
likely impact based on state-of-the-art
Cyclone EW by fully harnessing the benefits
of IMD’s modernisation plan will be
established. Storm surge and wind damage
modelling efforts including inundation and
impact over the land will be developed and
incorporated in the operational system with
priority (refer sections 2.4, 2.5, 2.7.6).
[Action: MoEs, MoWR, State Remote
Sensing Agency (SRSAs), DM Depts.]
9. State-level technical capacities will be
enhanced to develop local-scale cyclone
impact assessment tools for hazard
mapping of wind damage and storm surge
inundation. Such a capability at the state
level will help in appropriate development
planning for cyclone risk mitigation and
emergency response and preparedness
planning. All coastal states and UTs will work
with the appropriate central government
ministries in collection, transmission and
archiving of regional scale observations.
States will also work with Survey of India
(SoI) and DoS towards developing spatial
and non-spatial data sets at the micro level
in support of cyclone vulnerability mapping
[Action: Survey of India, DoS, MoEs,
10. Efforts by central and state government
agencies for generating customised sector
specific multi-lingual cyclone warning for
facilitating community based emergency
response will be institutionalised on priority
[Action: SDMAs, NGOs, Civil Defence
(Refer section: 2.2.5) [Action: IMD, INCOIS, ISRO, NRSA]
Table 2.4 Nodal Agencies for Collection of Data related to Early Warning
2.12 Implementation Strategy and Time-Frame
2.12.1 Implementation Strategy
Various ministries/departments and agencies at the national level and states/UTs will have the responsibility
of implementing the guidelines in this chapter.
2.12.2 Following is the time-frame for implementation of activities listed in this chapter:
Time-frame for Different Activities
11. Satellite Communication System (SCS) for
meteorological data reception and delivery
with redundant bandwidth at par with other
global weather centres will be established
on priority. All necessary data reception
facilities, algorithm development, timely
product generation, etc., in respect of each
of the future satellites will be put in place in
time with the satellite launch so that the
respective products can become available
for cyclone early warning purposes (refer
3.1.1 An effective communication infrastructure
is a pre-requisite for the proper functioning of
cyclone warning and DM systems. The existing
communication infrastructure backbone has been
evolved over a period of time, using various
communication technologies available from time
to time. Several agencies play a vital role in
providing the requisite inputs and information by
using various communication networks.
3.1.2 Different types of networks are being used
for cyclone warning and DM work, such as the
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) telecom
network for voice/fax, cellular telephone network,
Disaster Warning System (DWS) terminals, NIC
infrastructure and services, Internet Data Centre,
Internet web-based network, radio broadcasting
transmitters of AIR, International Maritime Satellite
(INMARSAT) terminals, HAM radios, VSAT
networks, etc. Some of these systems are
vulnerable to cyclonic weather. In this chapter, the
communication systems used by different
stakeholders in DM are broadly discussed and
improvement in the system suggested after gap
analysis of the existing systems.
3.1.3 One of the critical short-term cyclone
disaster mitigation measures is timely warning to
the affected population and concerned officials
connected with DM. The IMD issues user-specific
warnings to various users like government agencies,
ports, fishermen, merchant navy, media, farmers,
general public, etc. Vari ous modes of
communication like telephone, fax, telex, radio
broadcast, telecast, print media, Internet, railways
microwave network, etc. are used to communicate
cyclone warnings to specific users as well as the
general public. Cyclone Warning Dissemination
Systems (CWDS) were introduced in India in the
1980s, and it is a fail-safe and rapid communication
system to issue cyclone warning directly to the
concerned communities from the IMD source using
the INSAT satellite transponder.
3.1.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) is the
focal point at the national level and it coordinates
appropriate dissemination of warnings received
from IMD, CWC, etc. The district administration is
the focal point for implementation of all
governmental plans and activities. The actual day-
to-day function of administering relief is the
responsibility of the Collector/District Magistrate/
Deputy Commissioner who exercises coordinating
and supervising powers over all departments at
the district level. Fail-safe communication
infrastructure is essential to continue their functions
3.1.5 Due to advancement in Information
Technology (IT) in the form of the Internet, GIS,
Remote Sensing, Satellite Communication, etc., it
has become possible to plan and implement
disaster reduction plans which, in turn, help to
contain the damage on a long-term basis.
3.1.6 The weather channel is one of the leading
modes of dissemination of weather information.
Weather warnings can be communicated through
a variety of formats (text, graphics, voice) and
disseminated via a wide range of media (press,
radio, television, e-mail, cell phone, Internet, etc.).
Media broadcasts from the weather office are a
routine practice in advanced countries. However,
an exclusive weather channel is not yet available in
India. Radio broadcast of warning bulletins has
proved to be one of the most effective and cheapest
modes of cyclone warnings to communities the
3.2.1 India Meteorological Department
3.2.1.1 IMD is the nodal agency for providing
cyclone warning services. IMD‘s INSAT satellite
based CWDS is one of the fail-proof systems
(satellite-based) currently in use in India to
communicate cyclone warnings from IMD to
communities and important officials in affected
areas directly and quickly. The cyclone warnings
are uplinked to the INSAT satellite in C-band. The
satellite audio broadcasts in regional languages are
continuously sent at fixed time intervals to the
coastal CWDS receiving stations. These warnings
are selective and received only by the likely affected
receiving stations in S-band. IMD has installed
specially designed receivers in the vulnerable coastal
areas for direct transmission of warnings to officials
3.2.2.1 Area Cyclone Warning Centres (ACWC) of
IMD generate these special warning bulletins and
transmit them every hour in the local languages.
IMD has installed 252 such analog receivers in the
field areas. The state-wise breakup of CWDS
stations is given in Table 3.1
3.2.2.2 IMD is planning to replace the existing 252
analog CWDS by Digital CWDS (DCWDS) receivers
and also to increase the number of DCWDS stations
all along the east and west coasts of India. Besides
this, 101 DCWDS stations are currently operational
only along the coast of Andhra Pradesh, and one in
Lakshadweep. Thus, the total number of CWDS
and DCWD receivers currently in position is 353
with uplink stations at RMC–Chennai and IMD’s
Satellite Meteorological Division at New Delhi.
3.2.2.3 There are inherent technological and
qualitative advantages of DCWDS as compared to
All analog CWDSs will be converted into DCWDSs
and some will be located at knowledge centres/
panchayat offices and community radio stations.
The DCWDS network will be extended to adequately
cover the cyclone prone coastal areas of the country.
3.3 Initiatives at the National Level
3.3.1 Ministry of Home Affairs (2003–05)
3.3.1.1 In recent years, the focus of DM is
increasingly moving towards more effective
WARNING: COMMUNICATION AND DISSEMINATION
Table 3.1 List of CWDS Stations installed in India
utilisation of emerging technologies such as remote
sensing, GIS and satellite communication, thus
helping to prepare for and mitigate potential
impacts. Under the existing framework in the
country, the responsibility of undertaking rescue,
relief and rehabilitation measures rests with the
concerned state government. The central
government provides financial and logistic support
in the event of major disasters. A Crisis
Management Committee (CMC) in the state, with
senior representatives from government
departments and central agencies located in the
state, supervises DM actions and activities.
3.3.1.2 The collaborative programme on Disaster
Risk Management taken up with UNDP support
covers 169 multi-hazard-prone districts which
include some of the cyclone-prone districts (out of
84) in the country and envisages assisting the states
to draw up plans for district/block/village levels to
build up effective resilience to disasters. Grass-root
level participation in DM actions is also envisaged.
3.3.1.3 A National Communication Plan has been
drawn up to harness the modern system of
communication for information flow, dissemination
of warnings, etc. A web-based inventory of
specialist resources (India Disaster Resource
Network, IDRN) required for DM support has been
3.3.2.1 Defence forces play a very important role
during cyclone disasters. The Armed Forces are
quickest to reach the affected areas for delivering
timely action. Restoration of communication by
them is very often a major contribution. The Air Force
assists in search and rescue, evacuation and air-
dropping of relief supplies. The Indian Navy and
Coast Guard divers assist in rescue operations as
3.3.3.1 In its basic form, an operation centre (OC)
is functional with MHA. The communication network
between the national and state Emergency
Operation Centres (EOCs) and the site of the
emergencies is currently based on the DoT network.
This is the first casualty due to damage to
communication towers and hence multi-mode
communication systems are essential with enough
redundancy for disaster time communication.
POLNET is extensively used for DM requirements.
For emergency communication, efforts are on with
the Department of Space (ISRO) for making available
alternate satellite communication units to connect
state EOCs with mobile units which can be
transported to the site of a disaster through
SPACENET . Currently, about 35 SPACENET nodes
are being made operational between NDMA/MHA
with different state EOCs. The National Disaster
Management Communication Group at NDMA is
planning to set up satellite-based mobile voice/data/
video communication between national EOC, state
3.4.1 The terminal-end equipment and
communication back-up equipment support is a
bare minimum. The communication connectivity is
purely Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)/
Public Switched Data Network (PSDN) dependent.
The OC at MHA would require due upgradation.
For effective DM, both for routine activities and also
during disasters, there is an urgent need to create
a fully automated and state-of-the-art OC at NDMA
and MHA with all terminal-end facilities and
communication connectivity in various modes (voice,
data and video) to respective SDMAs and SEOCs,
DDMAs and DEOCs, with the disaster sites. When
NDRF arrives at the site, it helps to enhance last
3.4.2 State/District Level Emergency
3.4.2.1 The primary function of a state EOC is to
implement various DM activities under the
supervision of the Secretary/DM Commissioner. At
the district level, the Collector/District Magistrate/
Deputy Commissioner is responsible for
implementing all governmental DM plans and
activities. Till the time the DEOCs become fully
functional, the existing district control rooms will
serve as nodal facilities for directing operations in
3.4.3 VSAT Network of the National
3.4.3.1 The mode of NICNET communication is
leased lines, VSATs, RF and ISDN/PSDN dial-up
lines. The service provided over the network is
primarily data. Voice and video is also provided in
a limited scale. Video conferencing facilities are
available in more than 450 locations.
3.4.3.2 NICNET has been offering network services
over Ku-Band VSATs Single Channel Per Carrier
(SCPC) - Demand Assigned Multiple Access
(DAMA) and Frequency Time Division Multiple
Access (FTDMA) - satellite broadband Digital Video
Broadcasts (DVB), Wireless Metropolitan Area
Networks (MANs) and Local Area Networks (LANs)
with NICNET gateway for Internet resources. A high-
speed NICNET national info-highway, an incremental
overlay over the existing network has been set up
with SCPC, FTDMA, TDMA VSATs, DVB Broadband
VSAT technology and wireless Metropolitan Area
Network (MAN) to take advantage of the Internet
technology in India. Various satellite networks in use
by NICNET and their corresponding network
technologies are shown in Table 3.2.
3.4.4 Satellite-based real time voice data
messaging for Cyclone Warning System
Emergency managers need to send timely and
appropriate alerts to everyone who needs them.
Authoritative alert messages will be transmitted
through all available communication media as
appropriate, whether land-based, space-based or
wireless, including individual targeting. Alerts can
be converted automatically and securely from a
standard format into forms suitable for each
technology: the Internet, news media, television,
radio, wired telephones, mobile phones, etc.
3.4.5 Satellite-based multi-lingual disaster
3.4.5.1 Network Management Software (NMS) for
Digital Cyclone Warning Dissemination Systems
(DCWDS) is responsible for creation, transmission
and monitoring of cyclone warning messages to
unmanned satellite receivers installed all along the
Indian coastal line. Audio messages, captured by
a microphone, are digitised using MPEG-II format
to create message packets in a customised
protocol, with unique headers for selected stations.
Header and message packets jointly form a data
packet so that the required receivers are only
energised by the transmission while others are not
energised. Acknowledgement messages sent by
the remote station’s receivers are captured, analysed
and checked periodically. All the transmitted
messages and acknowledgement messages are
logged systematically. IMD and concerned state
governments are the users of this system.
Table 3.2 VSAT services by NICNET
3.4.6 Digital Video Broadcast with Return
Carrier through satellite (DVB-RC)
3.4.6.1 The DVB-RCS system supports
communication in the channel in two directions:
• Forward channel from the hub-station to
• Return channel from the terminals to the hub-
3.4.6.2 The forward channel provides ‘point to
multipoint’ service because it is sent by a station at
a single point to stations at many different points.
The terminals share the return channel capacity of
one or more satellite transponders by transmitting
in burst, using multi-frequency-Time Division
Multiple Access. This is a two-way communication
3.4.7.1 EDUSAT is the first Indian satellite designed
and developed exclusively for serving the
educational sector. It is mainly intended to meet
the demand for an interactive satellite-based
distance education system for the country. It strongly
reflects India’s commitment to the use of space
technology for national development, especially in
remote and rural locations. It is a collaborative
project of the Ministry of Human Resource
Development (MHRD), DoS and ISRO.
3.4.7.2 EDUSAT is being implemented through the
i) Indira Gandhi National Open University
ii) National Council of Educational Research
iii) U niversity Grants Commission (UGC).
iv) Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR).
v) All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE).
3.4.7.3 MHRD has been actively promoting the
open and distance learning systems in the country.
The launch of the Gyan Darshan bouquet of satellite-
based TV channels and Gyan Vani FM Radio
Network are recent examples. MHRD has also
proposed the use of Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) capabilities of the
EDUSAT satellite for Elementary Education, Literacy,
Vocational Training and Teachers’ Training. At a later
phase, it will expand to include Agriculture, Health
and Community Development Programmes, etc.
The EDUSAT network offers various application
capabilities like virtual classroom, video-on-
demand, database access, data transfer, online
education and radio networking.
DM programmes will be developed and telecast
3.5.1 Feasibility surveys are being carried out in
all states of India to establish a VSAT network linking
the state headquarters with divisional and district
headquarters, and a VHF radio network linking the
district headquarters with sub-divisional and taluka
headquarters which will have control at the national
3.5.2 Various technology options are available to
provide communication among EOCs at the
national and state capitals, district headquarters
control rooms, sub-divisional/taluka level set-up
and, finally, mobile, temporary VSAT set-ups at the
disaster sites. A block diagram of the proposed
communication hub network and technology options
for communication and connectivity are given in
Figure 2. In the rare event of a failure of the civil
communication network, it will be connected with
headquarters and operations room of the Defence
Services command/area/sub-area and local level
to augment the communications further as per the
3.6 Communication Support for DM
3.6.1 For efficient management of disasters, an
effective communication system is one of the key
factors. DM involves organizations and departments,
both governmental and non-government, including
3.6.2 The basic communication and IT support
for DM is therefore required for the following:
i ) Monitoring and forecasting agencies like
IMD, CWC, NRSA and DoS and so on.
ii) G overnmental machinery for giving out early
warning of impending disasters/disaster-
iii) NDMA/OC will link with all stakeholders in
a bilateral mode at the national, states/UTs
and district levels, both for routine
functioning as well as management of EOCs
iv) Communication and IT support is also
required for various other ministries,
departments and organizations involved in
DM along with NDMA. This is mainly for
coordination and execution. ICT linkages
would be required for all such users.
v) Response forces such as NDRF , SDRF , Para
Military Force (PMF), Police, Defence forces,
Corporate, NGOs and any other organization,
3.7 Existing Backbone Communication
3.7.1 As already stated, the communication
infrastructure is a pre-requisite for proper functioning
of the cyclone warning and DM system. The
existing communication infrastructure has evolved
over a period of time using various communication
technologies available from time to time.
3.7.2.1 DTH service provides different language
channels in every nook and corner of the country.
The most significant aspect of DTH broadcast is
its digital quality, fail-proof communication. Apart
from the DTH service of Prasar Bharati (PB), private
broadcasters like Dish TV and Tata Sky also provide
services on different television channels all over the
Since the DTH services of PB, Dish TV and Tata Sky
are providing reception in remote and rural areas,
the services of DTH, Dish TV and Tata Sky will be
utilised for dissemination of cyclone warnings and
for weather information on radio/TV channels to the
places not covered by terrestrial and cable operators.
Figure 2 Block Diagram of Proposed Communication Hub
3.7.3 World Space Satellite based Digital
3.7.3.1 IMD has started a new meteorological data
and processed products broadcasting service from
1 July 2003 using the World Space ‘ Asia Star’
satellite. This is a replacement of the HF broadcast
system which has become outdated.
3.7.3.2 The receiving system consists of a satellite
receiver and a Digital Data Adaptor (DDA) designed
exclusively to work with the World Space Satellite
System and can be used to visualise data, satellite
images, weather charts, automatic plotting of data,
analysis and manipulation of data for the benefit of
weather forecasters and other users. This could be
considered as an alternative option. From such
warning broadcasts, besides others, the fishermen
out at sea will be benefited the most.
3.7.4.1 Community radio is defined as radio that
is owned by the community and airs programmes
designed and produced by it specifically for its own
developmental needs. The communities that
produce these radio programmes cablecast,
narrowcast or buy time from the AIR local radio
stations. In order to give wide publicity of natural
disasters among the communities, community
radio will be established in cyclone-prone areas with
the help of IGNOU and other open universities,
NGOs and Community Based Organisations
(CBOs); the cost if any, will also be met by them. If
a DCWDS receiver can be co-located with the
community radio, it will add value and considerably
increase the outreach of warnings.
3.7.5.1 It has been reported that corrosion of
batteries in transistors carried by some fishermen
out at sea is one of the major reasons for the non-
receipt of warning broadcasts by AIR, besides
attenuation of signals in adverse weather. Some
battery-less, low-cost hand radios are now available
in the market which will be useful for receiving
warnings by fishermen at sea where battery
operated radios generally do not work.
Battery-less hand radio sets will be provided to
3.7.6 Satellite Phone Services
3.7.6.1 At the time of emerge ncies, a
communication system with clear voice and data
communication facility having mobility and reliability,
are important factors. Satellite phone services
provide these assurances almost anywhere in the
world, even in areas of total devastation and in areas
where even electricity is not available. Satellite
portable phones work like cellular phones where
cellular coverage is available, and as satellite phones
where it is absent. The communications are
completely independent of any local telephony
infrastructure. One need not worry about service
disruptions because of power failures or other
events common in disaster areas. Therefore, satellite
phone services can be extremely useful in saving
lives and coordinating efforts during rescue
operations, such as the setting up of telemedicine
links up to the taluka/mandal level. These phone
services can be used by the Red Cross, doctors,
police, fire departments, ambulance services,
search and rescue, NDRF , district collectors and
other government emergency response
3.7.7.1 Currently, there are two types of mobile
phone technologies available in India. These are
broadly known as Global System for Mobile
communications (GSM) and Code Division Multiple
Access (CDMA). BSNL and MTNL and some private
telecom companies like Bharti, Reliance, Tata, Idea,
Vodafone offer both GSM and CDMA mobile phone
services in India. Some GSM operators offer GPRS
services also, where a download speed of up to 30
kbps is available. The battery- based mobile base
stations can be quite helpful during natural disasters
when electricity supply links become inoperative.
Besides voice communications, nowadays mobile
phones also provide pay services like Short Message
Service (SMS), news updates, railway and airline
information, etc., that can be used by subscribers.
BSNL/MTNL and all private telecom companies will
provide capability to access the designated four-
digit toll free number for information related to
cyclone alerts and warnings from landlines and
3.7.8.1 A GSM mobile network can provide the
facility to broadcast short messages to mobile
phone users within the network of an operator on a
real time basis (in seconds). This is the cell
3.7.8.2 Radio and TV stations can have access to
the cell broadcast facility via an entry provided by
the GSM mobile network operator. Various areas
can be identified using GIS. For every area, an
emergency message can be specified such as for
cyclone alert, cyclone warning, etc. This message
can be broadcast on a regular basis (for example,
every 5 minutes). As time passes, the broadcast
message can be updated, or removed if necessary.
It is also possible to specify messages in various
languages so that end-users can receive
emergency notifications in their native
language. Geneva Technologies of Bangalore has
developed an automated multi-lingual SMS
generation software in 14 regional languages
through a joint effort with the Department of Science
i ) Real time emergency notification via GSM
ii) Location specific information repeated
frequently and updated if required.
iii) Areas can be identified with powerful GIS.
iv) Communities can be informed in
v) Cost-effective solutions for mass
communication by making use of existing
i) Cell broadcast entry at emergency
organisations to specify messages per area.
ii) Standardised emergency channels provided
by mobile network operator(s).
iii) Create user awareness to activate
appropriate cell broadcast channels on
mobile phones (optionally, this can be done
3.7.8.3 Ce ll broadcast is a non-intrusive push
technology as mobile users are able to activate or
de-activate a certain cell broadcast channel (similar
to adjusting a radio or television to a certain
3.7.9.1 In the present era of electronic
communication, the Internet provides a useful
platform for DM communications. Launching of a
well-defined web site is a very cost-effective means
of making an intra-national and international impact.
It provides a new and potentially revolutionary option
for the rapid, automatic and global dissemination
of disaster information. A number of individuals,
organisations and groups, including IMD, are using
the Internet for real time dissemination of weather
observations, forecasts, satellite and other data. In
the most critical phase of natural disasters,
electronic communication has provided the most
effective, and in some instances perhaps the only
means of communication with the outside world.
3.7.10.1 AIR has started an interactive broadcasting
service ‘AIR News-on-Phone’. AIR listeners now do
not have to wait for the broadcast time to listen to
the news. AIR news highlights can now be
accessed on any type of telephone, at any time
and from anywhere in the world. For this purpose,
AIR news headlines are directly recorded and stored
in a dedicated computer system connected with a
telephone interface for subsequent retrieval on
telephone lines. The recording as well as playback
of the news is achieved in real time. Through this
service, listeners can access a capsule of the latest
news highlights in Hindi and English, on telephone.
Such a system can be put into operation at the
time of emergencies like natural disasters.
3.7.11 Emergency Warning System for
3.7.11.1 This system uses relatively simple
equipment and ensures stable operations. In an
emergency, the emergency warning system control
signal replaces the radio and TV programme
signals and automatically activates the emergency
warning system ready receivers even when they
3.7.11.2 In digital broadcasting, the emergency
warning system control signal is transmitted by
multiplexing with the broadcast wave to
automatically activate the receivers even when these
are in sleep mode. The emergency warning system
signal will be robust to prevent its misuse.
It is anticipated that in future the digital emergency
warning system function will most likely be
incorporated in mobile hand-held devices. Sending
emergency information to these terminals will be
highly effective as these will be carried by the general
public when the mobile TV becomes popular.
3.7.12 Radio Receivers for Emergency
3.7.12.1 AIR has a large network of AM/FM
transmitters which can be effectively used to
convey emergency messages to the public on
natural disasters. Since all these transmitters are
of analog type, it will be advisable to go in for the
3.7.12.2 A transmission format which has fixed
code will be more suitable for India as it does not
contain the area code. The CD containing EWS
control signals can be played back on AM/FM
transmitters located in the region affected by natural
disasters as an alarm for users of analog radio
receivers even in sleep mode. A simple algorithm
that runs on a tiny microprocessor needs to be
installed in the receiving device. The device can be
pre-installed in radio sets by electronics
manufacturers. This can also be considered as an
3.7.13 Digital Radio Mondiale (DRM)
3.7.13.1 This technology developed by a
consortium of broadcasters and equipment
manufactures, uses the broadcast band below 30
MHz. It gives near FM quality with the existing
bandwidth available in MW/SW band. This system
also has the option of data broadcasting and added
features like programme associated data (PAD) or
additional speech channel. This system uses the
existing band of frequency allocated for MW and
SW broadcast. Due to its long-range coverage in
the SW band, the broadcaster can reach across
the continent carrying digital programmes without
any fading. The technology is fully developed and
more than 60 broadcasters all over the world are
3.7.13.2 The following are the advantages of this
i) A large area can be covered from own home
territory by using a single-station infrastructure.
ii) Common disadvantages like night-time
shrinkage, interference due to manmade
noise of the AM bands will disappear.
iii) It is capable of supporting additional
channels for associated data and
iv) It is possible to have an additional speech
quality and data channel within the available
v) It has a cost-effective receiver system which
is compatible with all modes of radio
transmission (analog as well as digital).
3.7.13.3 A proposal for replacement of the existing
50 kw SW transmitters at Port Blair, Hyderabad,
Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai and Chennai by DRM
DRM Transmitters will be installed to cover all
3.7.14 Common Services Centre Scheme
3.7.14.1 The Government of India has formulated
the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) with the
vision of providing all government services in an
integrated manner at the doorstep of the citizen, at
an affordable cost. NeGP initiatives consist of 26
central, state and integrated Mission Mode Projects
(MMPs) along with eight other support components
for rapid introduction of e-governance in the country.
NeGP envisions a three-pillar model for delivery of
‘Web-enabled Anytime, Anywhere, Anyhow access’
to information and services in rural India.
i) Connectivity: State Wide Area Networks
ii) Nati onal Data Bank/State Data Centres
iii) Common Services Centres (CSCs).
3.7.14.2 The CSC scheme has a 3-tier
i) At the first (CSC) level, it would be the local
village-level entrepreneur (VL-loosely
analogous to a franchisee) to service the
rural consumer in a cluster of 5–6 villages.
ii) At the second/middle level, it would be an
entity termed the Service Centre Agency
(SCA—loosely analogous to a franchiser) to
operate, manage and build the VLE network
and business. An SCA would be identified
for one or more districts (one district would
iii) At t he third level, it would be the agency
designated by the state—the State
Designated Agency (SDA), to facilitate
implementation of the development scheme
within the state and to provide the requisite
policy, content and other support to SCAs.
3.7.14.3 Determining the CSC location
i) The aim of the CSC scheme is to establish
100,000 rural kiosks across the country with
an equitable spread at the rate of one CSC
for every six census villages. The state
government will have to work out the number
of CSCs that will be established in each
block across the state, based on the above
ii) The SCA may be given the discretion to
locate CSCs anywhere within a block within
the overall ceiling arrived at, based on the
criterion mentioned above. The SCA,
however, would need to ensure that not more
than one CSC is established in one gram
panchayat, unless the number of gram
panchayats in a block is less than the
number worked out, based on the criteria
DIT/states/UTs will set up one CSC for every
census village in cyclone vulnerable coastal
iii) W herever the state government proposes
to set up a larger number of CSCs than those
prescribed as per the criteria mentioned
above for certain specific reasons, prior
approval of the Department of Information
T echnology (DIT), Government of India, would
need to be taken by the concerned state
3.7.15 State Wide Area Networks (SWAN)
3.7.15.1 In the states, SWAN is the approved
scheme of GoI for interconnecting state
headquarters with District headquarters and District
headquarters with Block headquarters with
minimum 2 mbps leased lines, in order to create a
secure government network for the purpose of
delivering Government-to-Government (G2G) and
G2C services. The scheme is approved for 29 states
and six UTs at an estimated outlay of Rs 3,334 crore,
with Rs 2,005 crore as grant-in-aid from DIT . The
balance fund would be supported by the state plan.
The pre-project implementation period is 18 months
with a five-year operational period. This scheme is
presently at various stages of implementation
across the country. The National Informatics Centre
(NIC) currently operates a Ku-Band VSAT network
connecting all districts (barring a few newly created
ones) with 64 kbps satellite link. Some districts in
the country are also connected to the video-
conferencing facility on NICNET through 2 mbps
DAMA VSATs. Orissa is implementing a VSAT
network up to the block level through NIC. NIC is
currently planning restructuring and augmentation
of the existing NICNET as a viable G2G network in
order to position it as the core infrastructure for G2G
3.7.15.2 Implementation options for the states
i) Using NIC to establish SWAN by suitably
extending the existing NICNET up to the
ii) To engage a competent private/public sector
agency through an appropriate competitive
bid process and under a suitable service
level agreement [Build Operate Own (BOO)/
Build Operate Own Transfer (BOOT etc.)],
to establish and run the SWAN.
iii) To estab lish and own the SWAN
infrastructure directly by the state and use
a private service provider for operations and
iv) Any other Public Private Partnership (PPP)
model considered appropriate by the state.
3.7.15.3 State/UT governments are presently
adopting one of the two options approved in the
Scheme: Option-I is Public Private Partnership (PPP)
and the other is the NIC option. In the PPP option,
the state/UT government would be implementing
the SWAN project by selecting the network operator
at the state/UT level by following a competitive bid
process. In Option-II, NIC will be the implementing
agency and NIC would be operating the SWAN on
behalf of the state/UT concerned for the next five
3.7.15.4 All these SWANs would be connected
through NICNET for all central applications, for which
suitable guidelines for standardization,
interoperability and interconnect requirements
between NICNET and the SWANs and also
between different SWANs have been worked out.
The network architecture for such SWANs has been
specified. SWANs set up under Option-II would
necessarily have the required interconnectivity with
NICNET. Irrespective of the implementation option
adopted, existing NICNET infrastructure would be
used as a back-up for emergencies and disasters.
