Heat Wave - Guidelines and Advisories - NDMA
Advisory on Gender-Responsive Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience
Advisory on the use of Extended Heat Index (EHI) and Extended Heat Index-350 (EHI-350) for Heat preparedness and response
Advisory on Heat Wave protection in Housing and Human Settlements
Advisory- Disability Inculsive Disaster Risk Reduction
Advisory for protecting Informal Workers during Heatwave
Heat Wave - Guidelines and Advisories - NCDC, MoHFW
Advisory for the State Health Department on Heat Wave Season 2024
Strengthening health systems preparedness for heat-related illnesses (HRI) in India
Guidelines on Emergency Cooling for Severe Heat-Related Illnesses
Guidelines on Autopsy Findings in Heat Related Deaths
Public Health Advisory (Do's and Don'ts): Extreme Heat/Heat Wave 2024 (updated)
A Heat Wave is a period of abnormally high temperatures, more than the normal maximum temperature that occurs during the summer season in the North-Western parts of India. Heat Waves typically occur between March and June, and in some rare cases even extend till July. The extreme temperatures and resultant atmospheric conditions adversely affect people living in these regions as they cause physiological stress, sometimes resulting in death.
The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has given the following criteria for Heat Waves :
Heat Wave need not be considered till maximum temperature of a station reaches atleast 40°C for Plains and atleast 30°C for Hilly regions
When normal maximum temperature of a station is less than or equal to 40°C Heat Wave Departure from normal is 5°C to 6°C Severe Heat Wave Departure from normal is 7°C or more
When normal maximum temperature of a station is more than 40°C Heat Wave Departure from normal is 4°C to 5°C Severe Heat Wave Departure from normal is 6°C or more
When actual maximum temperature remains 45°C or more irrespective of normal maximum temperature, heat waves should be declared. Higher daily peak temperatures and longer, more intense heat waves are becomingly increasingly frequent globally due to climate change. India too is feeling the impact of climate change in terms of increased instances of heat waves which are more intense in nature with each passing year, and have a devastating impact on human health thereby increasing the number of heat wave casualties.
Higher daily peak temperatures and longer, more intense heat waves are becomingly increasingly frequent globally due to climate change. India too is feeling the impact of climate change in terms of increased instances of heat waves which are more intense in nature with each passing year, and have a devastating impact on human health thereby increasing the number of heat wave casualties.
The health impacts of Heat Waves typically involve dehydration, heat cramps, heat exhaustion and/or heat stroke. The signs and symptoms are as follows:
Heat Cramps: Ederna (swelling) and Syncope (Fainting) generally accompanied by fever below 39°C i.e.102°F.
Heat Exhaustion: Fatigue, weakness, dizziness, headache, nausea, vomiting, muscle cramps and sweating.
Heat Stoke: Body temperatures of 40°C i.e. 104°F or more along with delirium, seizures or coma. This is a potential fatal condition
If you think someone is suffering from the heat:
Move the person to a cool place under the shade
Give water or a rehydrating drink (if the person is still conscious)
Consult a doctor if symptoms get worse or are long lasting or the person is unconscious
Do not give alcohol, caffeine or aerated drink
Cool the person by putting a cool wet cloth on his/her face/body
Electrolyte / Glucose / Oral Rehydration
