Risk communication and community engagement
Risk communication is the real-time exchange of information, advice and opinions between experts or officials and people who face a hazard or threat to their survival, health, or economic or social wellbeing. The purpose of risk communication is to enable people at risk to make informed decisions to mitigate the effects of a threat (hazard) – such as a disease outbreak – and take protective and preventive measures. Risk communication is proven to be a critical tool in emergency preparedness and response. It is a core capacity of the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) and is one of five strategies within the Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) framework.
Community engagement is the process of developing relationships and structures that engage communities as equal partners in the creation of emergency response solutions that are acceptable and workable for those they impact. The goal of community engagement is to empower communities to confidently share the leadership, planning and implementation of initiatives throughout the health emergency response cycle.
Lessons learned in risk communication and community engagement initiatives in every public health emergency have informed subsequent response efforts, leading to planning that better integrates risk communication into operational activities and brings communities to the forefront as valued and essential partners for effective, equitable and inclusive emergency preparedness and response. Risk communication and community engagement works alongside other technical areas to ensure that accurate information is delivered to communities in ways that are acceptable and workable for them.
The Community Protection and Resilience (CPR) Unit supports countries
and partners in building community resilience and safeguarding public
health before, during, and after emergencies. By leveraging WHO’s
expertise, it provides technical guidance to reduce health risks and
ensure effective, community-centered emergency response. The unit works
closely with governments, partners, and local communities to develop
sustainable, community-led solutions tailored to diverse needs and
contexts. A key focus of the CPR Unit is fostering a community-centered
approach to health emergencies, ensuring that local voices and
priorities shape preparedness and response efforts.
communication, community engagement, and infodemic management, the unit
empowers communities with accessible, evidence-based information,
enabling them to make informed decisions that protect their health.
Read the Community Protection and Resilience (CPR) Unit page
Read Communicating risk in public health emergencies: a WHO guideline for emergency risk communication (ERC) policy and practice
Read WHO Outbreak Communication Planning Guide
Earthquake in Türkiye and the Syrian Arab Republic
Congo: effectively raising community awareness to protect against mpox
WHO partners with Thailand and Sri Lanka to pilot a new tool to combat and address infodemics
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever in Iraq: a risk communication and community engagement success story
Risk communication and community engagement joins forces with One Health in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Communicating COVID risks: How the RCCE team is gearing up to develop messages for the next phase of the pandemic
Risk communication and community engagement readiness and response toolkits
Risk communication and community engagement readiness and response toolkit: mass gatherings
This toolkit contains a comprehensive set of practical tools and resources designed to support country-level risk communication and community engagement...
Risk communication and community engagement readiness and response toolkit: ebola disease
This toolkit is a comprehensive set of practical tools and resources designed to support country-level risk communication and community engagement...
Risk communication and community engagement readiness and response toolkit: zika virus
This toolkit is a comprehensive set of practical tools and resources designed to support country-level risk communication and community engagement (RCCE)...
Risk communication and community engagement readiness and response toolkit: dengue fever
Risk communication and community engagement readiness and response toolkit: mpox
Risk communication and community engagement readiness and response toolkit: yellow fever
