Diarrhoeal disease is the second leading cause of death in children under five years old, and was responsible for the deaths of 370,000 children in 2019. The most severe threat posed by diarrhoea is dehydration. During an episode of diarrhoea, water and electrolytes including sodium, chloride, potassium and bicarbonate are lost through liquid stools, vomit, sweat, urine and breathing. A person with diarrhoea becomes dehydrated when these losses are not replaced. In addition, diarrhoea is a major cause of malnutrition, making the person more susceptible to future bouts of diarrhoea and to other diseases.
There are three clinical types of diarrhoea, each with its specific treatments:
Acute watery diarrhoea, which may last several hours or days, and includes cholera.
Acute bloody diarrhoea, also called dysentery.
Persistent diarrhoea, lasting 14 days or longer.
In the past, for most children, severe dehydration and fluid loss were the main causes of dying from diarrhoea. Now, other causes such as septic bacterial infections are likely to account for an increasing proportion of all diarrhoea-associated deaths.
Exclusive breastfeeding is protective and prevents diarrhoea from occurring in young children. Breastfeeding also reduces the severity of diarrhoea.
Innovative activities and demand creation are important for achieving behaviour change and sustaining long-term preventive practices to combat preventable morbidity and mortality from diarrhoeal diseases.
Diarrhoea is the passage of 3 or more loose or liquid stools per day, or more frequently than is normal for the individual. It is usually a symptom of gastrointestinal infection, which can be caused by a variety of bacterial, viral and parasitic organisms. Infection is spread through contaminated food or drinking-water, or from person to person as a result of poor hygiene.
Key measures to prevent diarrhoea include the following:
exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life.
health education about how infections spread.
Key measures to treat diarrhoea include the following:
Rehydration with oral rehydration salts (ORS) solution: ORS, particularly the low osmolarity formula, are a proven life-saving commodity for the treatment of children with diarrhoea.
Rehydration may require intravenous fluids in case of severe dehydration or shock.
Zinc supplements reduce the duration of a diarrhoea episode by 25% and are associated with a 30% reduction in stool volume.
Nutrient-rich foods: the vicious circle of malnutrition and diarrhoea can be broken by continuing to give nutrient-rich foods – including breast milk – during an episode, and by giving a nutritious diet – including exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life – to children when they are well.
Consulting a health professional , in particular for management of persistent diarrhoea, or when there is blood in the stool, or if there are signs of dehydration.
Adequate nutrition is key to improving natural defenses, starting with exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months of life.
What are the key health dangers for children?
Monitoring Visualization Tool for the Global Action Plan for Pneumonia and Diarrhoea (GAPPD)
Global Health Observatory: Water and Sanitation
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Ageing
Signing ceremony for contribution agreements between WHO and France
WHO releases a web version of the second edition of its Global Accelerated Action for the Health of Adolescents (AA-HA!) guidance
WHO releases updated guidance on adolescent health and well-being
1 in 3 people globally do not have access to safe drinking water – UNICEF, WHO
Water, sanitation and hygiene and infection prevention and control measures for infectious diarrhoea...
This operational guide addresses water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), food safety management, and infection prevention and control (IPC) measures that...
WHO SEAR 17th Epidemiological Bulletin 2024
This epidemiological bulletin aims to provide the situation of key infectious diseases in the WHO South-East Asia region to inform risk assessments and...
Ensuring the access of all people to sufficient, safe water and adequate sanitation and encouraging
personal, domestic and community hygiene will improve...
Exploratory meeting to review new evidence for Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (‎IMCI)‎ danger...
For children up to 5 years of age with common childhood illnesses, WHO’s IMCI
strategy recommends using clinical signs for diagnosis, treatment...
Lower-Dose Zinc for Childhood Diarrhea — A Randomized, Multicenter Trial
Article in New England Journal of Medicine, 24 September 2020
